spencer j. volk, president and chief operating officer of this consumer and industrial products company, was elected a director. mr. volk, 55 years old, succeeds duncan dwight, who retired in september.
in an age of specialization, the federal judiciary is one of the last bastions of the generalist. a judge must jump from murder to antitrust cases, from arson to securities fraud, without missing a beat. but even on the federal bench, specialization is creeping in, and it has become a subject of sharp controversy on the newest federal appeals court. the court of appeals for the federal circuit was created in 1982 to serve, among other things, as the court of last resort for most patent disputes. previously, patent cases moved through the court system to one of the 12 circuit appeals courts. there, judges who saw few such cases and had no experience in the field grappled with some of the most technical and complex disputes imaginable. a new specialty court was sought by patent experts, who believed that the generalists had botched too many important, multimillion-dollar cases. some patent lawyers had hoped that such a specialty court would be filled with experts in the field. but the reagan administration thought otherwise, and so may the bush administration. since 1984, the president has filled four vacancies in the federal circuit court with non-patent lawyers. now only three of the 12 judges -- pauline newman, chief judge howard t. markey, 68, and giles rich, 85 -- have patent-law backgrounds. the latter two and judge daniel m. friedman, 73, are approaching senior status or retirement. three seats currently are vacant and three others are likely to be filled within a few years, so patent lawyers and research-based industries are making a new push for specialists to be added to the court. several organizations, including the industrial biotechnical association and the pharmaceutical manufacturers association, have asked the white house and justice department to name candidates with both patent and scientific backgrounds. the associations would like the court to include between three and six judges with specialized training. some of the associations have recommended dr. alan d. lourie, 54, a former patent agent with a doctorate in organic chemistry who now is associate general counsel with smithkline beckman corp. in philadelphia. dr. lourie says the justice department interviewed him last july. their effort has received a lukewarm response from the justice department. "we do not feel that seats are reserved (for patent lawyers)," says justice spokesman david runkel, who declines to say how soon a candidate will be named. "but we will take it into consideration." the justice department's view is shared by other lawyers and at least one member of the court, judge h. robert mayer, a former civil litigator who served at the claims court trial level before he was appointed to the federal circuit two years ago. "i believe that any good lawyer should be able to figure out and understand patent law," judge mayer says, adding that "it's the responsibility of highly paid lawyers (who argue before the court) to make us understand (complex patent litigation)." yet some lawyers point to eli lilly & co. vs. medtronic, inc., the patent infringement case the supreme court this month agreed to review, as an example of poor legal reasoning by judges who lack patent litigation experience. (judge mayer was not on the three-member panel.) in the lilly case, the appeals court broadly construed a federal statute to grant medtronic, a medical device manufacturer, an exemption to infringe a patent under certain circumstances. if the supreme court holds in medtronic's favor, the decision will have billion-dollar consequences for the manufacturers of medical devices, color and food additives and all other non-drug products that required food & drug administration approval. lisa raines, a lawyer and director of government relations for the industrial biotechnical association, contends that a judge well-versed in patent law and the concerns of research-based industries would have ruled otherwise. and judge newman, a former patent lawyer, wrote in her dissent when the court denied a motion for a rehearing of the case by the full court, "the panel's judicial legislation has affected an important high-technological industry, without regard to the consequences for research and innovation or the public interest." says ms. raines, "(the judgment) confirms our concern that the absence of patent lawyers on the court could prove troublesome."
the financial accounting standards board's coming rule on disclosure involving financial instruments will be effective for financial statements with fiscal years ending after june 15, 1990. the date was misstated in friday's edition. (see: "fasb plans rule on financial risk of instruments" -- wsj oct. 27, 1989)
kidder, peabody & co. is trying to struggle back. only a few months ago, the 124-year-old securities firm seemed to be on the verge of a meltdown, racked by internal squabbles and defections. its relationship with parent general electric co. had been frayed since a big kidder insider-trading scandal two years ago. chief executives and presidents had come and gone. now, the firm says it's at a turning point. by the end of this year, 63-year-old chairman silas cathcart -- the former chairman of illinois tool works who was derided as a "tool-and-die man" when ge brought him in to clean up kidder in 1987 -- retires to his lake forest, ill., home, possibly to build a shopping mall on some land he owns. "i've done what i came to do" at kidder, he says. and that means 42-year-old michael carpenter, president and chief executive since january, will for the first time take complete control of kidder and try to make good on some grandiose plans. mr. carpenter says he will return kidder to prominence as a great investment bank. wall street is understandably skeptical. through the first nine months of the year, kidder ranks a distant 10th among underwriters of u.s. stocks and bonds, with a 2.8% market share, up slightly from 2.5% in the year-earlier period, according to securities data co. it's quite a fall from the early 1980s, when kidder still was counted as an investment-banking powerhouse. gary s. goldstein, president of the whitney group, an executive search firm, said: "i'd like to see (kidder) succeed. but they have to attract good senior bankers who can bring in the business from day one." in 1988, kidder eked out a $46 million profit, mainly because of severe cost cutting. its 1,400-member brokerage operation reported an estimated $5 million loss last year, although kidder expects it to turn a profit this year. in fact, kidder is a minor player in just about every business it does except computer-driven program trading; in that controversial business, only morgan stanley & co. rivals kidder. but even that niche is under attack, as several wall street firms pulled back from program trading last week under pressure from big investors. mr. carpenter, a former consulting-firm executive who has a love for "task forces," says he has done a "complete rethink" of kidder in recent months. there have been a dizzying parade of studies of the firm's operations. more than 20 new managing directors and senior vice presidents have been hired since january. the firm's brokerage force has been trimmed and its mergers-and-acquisitions staff increased to a record 55 people. mr. carpenter says that when he assumes full control, kidder will finally tap the resources of ge. one of ge's goals when it bought 80% of kidder in 1986 was to take advantage of "syngeries" between kidder and general electric capital corp., ge's corporate-finance unit, which has $42 billion in assets. the leveraged buy-out group of ge capital now reports to mr. carpenter. so far, instead of teaming up, ge capital staffers and kidder investment bankers have bickered. yet, says mr. carpenter, "we've really started to exploit the synergy between ge capital and kidder peabody." the units have worked on 37 investment banking deals this year, he says, though not all of them have panned out. "we've had a good relationship with ge, which is the first time you could say that -- uh, let me withdraw that. it's been a steadily improving relationship," says mr. carpenter. still, without many actual deals to show off, kidder is left to stress that it finally has "a team" in place, and that everyone works harder. a month ago, the firm started serving dinner at about 7:30 each night; about 50 to 60 of the 350 people in the investment banking operation have consistently been around that late. "we are working significantly longer and harder than has been the case in the past," says scott c. newquist, kidder's head of investment banking since june. everywhere, kidder stresses the "always working" theme. a new in-house magazine, kidder world -- which will focus on the firm's synergy strategy, says mr. carpenter -- confides that on weekends mr. newquist "often gets value-added ideas while flying his single-engine cessna centurion on the way to nantucket." the firm's new head of mergers and acquisitions under mr. newquist, b.j. megargel, talks of the opportunity to "rebuild a franchise" at kidder. "the kidder name is one of only six or seven that every ceo recognizes as a viable alternative" when considering a merger deal, he says. now, according to a kidder world story about mr. megargel, all the firm has to do is "position ourselves more in the deal flow." with investment banking as kidder's "lead business," where do kidder's 42-branch brokerage network and its 1,400 brokers fit in? mr. carpenter this month sold off kidder's eight brokerage offices in florida and puerto rico to merrill lynch & co., refueling speculation that kidder is getting out of the brokerage business entirely. mr. carpenter denies the speculation. to answer the brokerage question, kidder, in typical fashion, completed a task-force study. the result: kidder will focus on rich individual investors and small companies, much closer to the clientele of goldman, sachs & co. than a serve-the-world firm like merrill lynch or shearson lehman hutton inc. mr. carpenter notes that these types of investors also are "sophisticated" enough not to complain about kidder's aggressive use of program trading. as part of the upscale push, kidder is putting brokers through a 20-week training course, turning them into "investment counselors" with knowledge of corporate finance. they will get "new and improved tools to sell, particularly to the affluent investor," says brokerage chief charles v. sheehan. theoretically, the brokers will then be able to funnel "leads" on corporate finance opportunities to kidder's investment bankers, possibly easing the longstanding tension between the two camps. however, skeptics caution that this kind of cross-pollination between brokers and investment bankers looks great on paper, but doesn't always happen. kidder competitors aren't outwardly hostile to the firm, as many are to a tough competitor like drexel burnham lambert inc. that doesn't have kidder's long history. however, competitors say that kidder's hiring binge involving executive-level staffers, some with multiple-year contract guarantees, could backfire unless there are results. the departing mr. cathcart says he has no worries about kidder's future. mr. cathcart, who will return to the quaker oats co. board of directors, in addition to his personal ventures, is credited with bringing some basic budgeting and planning discipline to traditionally free-wheeling kidder. he also improved the firm's compliance procedures for trading. mr. cathcart says he has had "a lot of fun" at kidder, adding the crack about his being a "tool-and-die man" never bothered him. "it was an absolutely marvelous line and one i used many times," he says. smiling broadly when he talks about mr. carpenter, mr. cathcart says the new kidder chief is "going to be recognized shortly as one of the real leaders in the investment-banking business." in coming years, mr. cathcart says, kidder is "gonna hum." or, as mr. carpenter, again drawing on his consulting-firm background, puts it: "we're ready to implement at this point."
under a proposal by democrats to expand individual retirement accounts, a $2,000 contribution by a taxpayer in the 33% bracket would save $330 on his taxes. the savings was given incorrectly in friday's edition. (see: "politics & policy: debate on iras centers on whether tax break should be immediate or put off till retirement" -- wsj oct. 27, 1989)
in what could prove a major addition to the philippines' foreign-investment portfolio, a taiwanese company signed a $180 million construction contract to build the centerpiece of a planned petrochemical complex. taiwan's usi far east corp., a petrochemical company, initialed the agreement with an unidentified japanese contractor to build a naphtha cracker, according to alson lee, who heads the philippine company set up to build and operate the complex. mr. lee, president of luzon petrochemical corp., said the contract was signed wednesday in tokyo with usi far east officials. contract details, however, haven't been made public. the complex is to be located in batangas, about 70 miles south of manila. usi far east will hold a 60% stake in luzon petrochemical, according to papers signed with the philippine government's board of investments. the proposed petrochemical plant would use naphtha to manufacture the petrochemicals propylene and ethylene and their resin derivatives, polypropylene and polyethylene. these are the raw materials used in making plastics. the contract signing represented a major step in the long-planned petrochemical project. at an estimated $360 million, the project would represent the single largest foreign investment in the philippines since president corazon aquino took office in february 1986. it also is considered critical to the country's efforts to both attract other investment from taiwan and raise heavy industry capabilities. the project has been in and out of the pipeline for more than a decade. however, workers can't break ground until legal maneuvers to block the complex are resolved, moves which caused the signing to remain questionable up to the last moment. as previously reported, a member of the philippines' house of representatives has sued to stop the plant. the legislator, enrique garcia, had actively backed the plant, but at the original site in his constituency northwest of manila. the country's supreme court dismissed the suit, but mr. garcia late last month filed for a reconsideration. in addition, president aquino has yet to sign into law a bill removing a stiff 48% tax on naphtha, the principal raw material to be used in the cracker. however, at a news conference thursday, mrs. aquino backed the project and said her government was attempting to soothe the feelings of residents at the original site, adjacent to the government's major petroleum refinery in bataan province. "we have tried our best to tell the people in bataan that maybe this time it will not go to them, but certainly we will do our best to encourage other investors to go to their province," mrs. aquino told manila-based foreign correspondents. the project appeared to be on the rocks earlier this month when the other major partner in the project, china general plastics corp., backed out. china general plastics, another taiwanese petrochemical manufacturer, was to have a 40% stake in luzon petrochemical. however, mr. lee said that usi far east is confident other investors will take up the slack. he said usi far east has applied to both the asian development bank and the world bank's international finance corp. for financing that could include equity stakes.
the yale political union doesn't pay an honorarium to speakers. in thursday's edition, it was incorrectly indicated that the union had paid a fee to former house speaker jim wright. (see: "in nation's capital, scandal needn't cut one's speaking fee --- jim wright, michael deaver and host of others find careers after disgrace" -- wsj oct. 26, 1989)
president bush insists it would be a great tool for curbing the budget deficit and slicing the lard out of government programs. he wants it now. not so fast, says rep. mickey edwards of oklahoma, a fellow republican. "i consider it one of the stupidest ideas of the 20th century," he says. it's the line-item veto, a procedure that would allow the president to kill individual items in a big spending bill passed by congress without vetoing the entire bill. whatever one thinks of the idea, it's far more than the budgetary gimmick it may seem at first glance. rather, it's a device that could send shock waves through the president's entire relationship with democrats and republicans alike in congress, fundamentally enhance the power of the presidency and transform the way the government does its business. president bush badly wants a line-item veto and has long called for a law giving it to the president. now the white house is declaring that he might not rely on congress -- which hasn't shown any willingness to surrender such authority -- to pass the line-item veto law he seeks. white house spokesmen last week said mr. bush is considering simply declaring that the constitution gives him the power, exercising a line-item veto and inviting a court challenge to decide whether he has the right. although that may sound like an arcane maneuver of little interest outside washington, it would set off a political earthquake. "the ramifications are enormous," says rep. don edwards, a california democrat who is a senior member of the house judiciary committee. "it's a real face-to-face arm wrestling challenge to congress." white house aides know it's a step that can't be taken lightly -- and for that reason, the president may back down from launching a test case this year. some senior advisers argue that with further fights over a capital-gains tax cut and a budget-reduction bill looming, mr. bush already has enough pending confrontations with congress. they prefer to put off the line-item veto until at least next year. still, mr. bush and some other aides are strongly drawn to the idea of trying out a line-item veto. the issue arose last week when vice president dan quayle told an audience in chicago that mr. bush was looking for a test case. white house press secretary marlin fitzwater confirmed that mr. bush was interested in the idea, but cautioned that there wasn't a firm decision to try it. mr. bush, former president reagan and a host of conservative activists have been arguing that a line-item veto would go a long way in restoring discipline to the budget process. they maintain that a president needs the ability to surgically remove pork-barrel spending projects that are attached to big omnibus spending bills. those bills can't easily be vetoed in their entirety because they often are needed to keep the government operating. conservatives note that 43 governors have the line-item veto to use on state budgets. more provocatively, some conservative legal theorists have begun arguing that mr. bush doesn't need to wait for a law giving him the veto because the power already is implicit in the constitution. they base their argument on a clause buried in article i, section 7, of the constitution that states: "every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the senate and house of representatives may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment) shall be presented to the president of the united states; and before the same shall take effect, shall be approved by him or . . . disapproved by him. . . ." this clause, they argue, is designed to go beyond an earlier clause specifying that the president can veto a "bill," and is broad enough to allow him to strike out items and riders within bills. senate minority leader robert dole (r., kan.), for one, accepts this argument and earlier this year publicly urged mr. bush "to use the line-item veto and allow the courts to decide whether or not it is constitutional." there's little doubt that such a move would be immediately challenged in court -- and that it would quickly make its way to the supreme court to be ultimately resolved. "it's a major issue, and they wouldn't want to leave it at a lower level," says stephen glazier, a new york attorney whose writings have been instrumental in pushing the idea that a president already has a line-item veto. rep. edwards, the california democrat, is one who pledges that he would immediately challenge mr. bush in the courts, arguing a line-item veto would expand a president's powers far beyond anything the framers of the constitution had in mind. "it puts this president in the legislative business," he declares. "that's not what our fathers had in mind." in addition to giving a president powers to rewrite spending bills meant to be written in congress, rep. edwards argues, a line-item veto would allow the chief executive to blackmail lawmakers. he notes that, as a lawmaker from the san francisco area, he fights each year to preserve federal funds for the bay area rapid transit system. if a president had a line-item veto and wanted to force him to support a controversial foreign-policy initiative, rep. edwards says, the president could call and declare that he would single-handedly kill the bart funds unless the congressman "shapes up" on the foreign-policy issue. proponents maintain that a president would choose to use a line-item veto more judiciously than that. but there may be another problem with the device: despite all the political angst it would cause, it mightn't be effective in cutting the deficit. big chunks of the government budget, like the entitlement programs of social security and medicare, wouldn't be affected. governors have found that they have to use the device sparingly to maintain political comity. and it isn't even clear that some pork-barrel projects can be hit with a line-item veto because they tend to be listed in informal conference reports accompanying spending bills rather than in the official bills themselves. still, proponents contend that the veto would have what mr. glazier calls an important "chilling effect" on all manner of appropriations bills. lawmakers, they say, would avoid putting many spending projects into legislation in the first place for fear of the embarrassment of having them singled out for a line-item veto later. whatever the outcome of a test case, president bush would have to move cautiously becase the very attempt would "antagonize not just democrats but republicans," says louis fisher, a scholar at the congressional research service who specializes in executive-legislative relations. republicans have as much interest as democrats in "the way the system works," he notes. indeed, although a majority of republican lawmakers favor a line-item veto, some, ranging from liberal oregon sen. mark hatfield to conservative rep. edwards are opposed. rep. edwards voices the traditional conservative view that it's a mistake to put too much power in the hands of a single person. conservatives pushing for a line-item veto now, he notes, may regret it later: "sometime, you're going to have a democratic president again" who'll use his expanded powers against those very same conservatives. "every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the senate and house of representatives may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment) shall be presented to the president of the united states; and before the same shall take effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of the senate and house of representatives, according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill." -- the constitution, article i, section 7, clause 3
this hasn't been kellogg co. 's year. the oat-bran craze has cost the world's largest cereal maker market share. the company's president quit suddenly. and now kellogg is indefinitely suspending work on what was to be a $1 billion cereal plant. the company said it was delaying construction because of current market conditions. but the memphis, tenn., facility wasn't to begin turning out product until 1993, so the decision may reveal a more pessimistic long-term outlook as well. kellogg, which hasn't been as successful in capitalizing on the public's health-oriented desire for oat bran as rival general mills inc., has been losing share in the $6 billion ready-to-eat cereal market. kellogg's current share is believed to be slightly under 40% while general mills' share is about 27%. led by its oat-based cheerios line, general mills has gained an estimated 2% share so far this year, mostly at the expense of kellogg. each share point is worth about $60 million in sales. analysts say much of kellogg's erosion has been in such core brands as corn flakes, rice krispies and frosted flakes, which represent nearly one-third of its sales volume. kellogg is so anxious to turn around corn flakes sales that it soon will begin selling boxes for as little as 99 cents, trade sources say. "cheerios and honey nut cheerios have eaten away sales normally going to kellogg's corn-based lines simply because they are made of oats," says merrill lynch food analyst william maguire. "they are not a happy group of people at battle creek right now." kellogg is based in battle creek, mich., a city that calls itself the breakfast capital of the world. another analyst, john c. maxwell jr. of wheat, first securities in richmond, va., recently went to a "sell" recommendation on kellogg stock, which closed friday at $71.75, down 75 cents, in new york stock exchange composite trading. "i don't think kellogg can get back to 40% this year," he said. "kellogg's main problem is life style. people are reading the boxes and deciding they want something that's `healthy' for you -- oats, bran." mr. maxwell said he wouldn't be surprised if, over the next two years or so, general mills' share increased to 30% or more. in announcing the plant delay, kellogg chairman william e. lamothe said, "cereal volume growth in the u.s. has not met our expectations for 1989." he said construction wouldn't resume until market conditions warrant it. kellogg indicated that it has room to grow without adding facilities. the company has five other u.s. plants, including a modern facility at its battle creek headquarters known as building 100, which is to add bran-processing and rice-processing capacity next year. general mills, meanwhile, finds itself constrained from boosting sales further because its plants are operating at capacity. a large plant in covington, ga., is to come on line next year. a kellogg officer, who asked not to be named, said the memphis project was "pulled in for a reconsideration of costs," an indication that the ambitious plans might be scaled back in any future construction. initial cost estimates for the plant, which was to have been built in phases, ranged from $1 billion to $1.2 billion. a company spokesman said it was "possible, but highly unlikely," that the plant might never be built. "as we regain our leadership level where we have been, and as we continue to put new products into the marketplace and need additional capacity, we will look at resuming our involvement with our plan," he said. the new facility was to have been the world's most advanced cereal manufacturing plant, and kellogg's largest construction project. the company had retained the fluor daniel unit of fluor corp. as general contractor. but in recent weeks, construction-industry sources reported that early preparation work was slowing at the 185-acre site. subcontractors said they were told that equipment orders would be delayed. fluor daniel already has reassigned most of its work crew, the sources said. last friday's announcement was the first official word that the project was in trouble and that the company's plans for a surge in market share may have been overly optimistic. until recently, kellogg had been telling its sales force and wall street that by 1992 it intended to achieve a 50% share of market, measured in dollar volume. although he called current market conditions "highly competitive," mr. lamothe, kellogg's chairman and chief executive officer, forecast an earnings increase for the full year. last year, the company earned $480.4 million, or $3.90 a share, on sales of $4.3 billion. as expected, kellogg reported lower third-quarter earnings. net fell 16% to $123.1 million, or $1.02 a share, from $145.7 million, or $1.18 a share. sales rose 4.8% to $1.20 billion from $1.14 billion. the company had a one-time charge of $14.8 million in the latest quarter covering the disposition of certain assets. the company wouldn't elaborate, citing competitive reasons.
parker hannifin corp., which is selling three automotive replacement parts divisions, said it will retain its automotive connectors and cliff impact divisions. the divisions that parker hannifin is retaining weren't mentioned in thursday's edition. (see: "parker hannifin sale" -- wsj oct. 26, 1989)
the following were among friday's offerings and pricings in the u.s. and non-u.s. capital markets, with terms and syndicate manager, as compiled by dow jones capital markets report: sun microsystems inc. -- $125 million of 6 3/8% convertible subordinated debentures due oct. 15, 1999, priced at 84.90 to yield 7.51%. the debentures are convertible into common stock at $25 a share, representing a 24% conversion premium over thursday's closing price. rated single-b-1 by moody's investors service inc. and single-b-plus by standard & poor's corp., the issue will be sold through underwriters led by goldman, sachs & co. hertz corp. -- $100 million of senior notes due nov. 1, 2009, priced at par to yield 9%. the issue, which is puttable back to the company in 1999, was priced at a spread of 110 basis points above the treasury's 10-year note. rated single-a-3 by moody's and triple-b by s&p, the issue will be sold through underwriters led by merrill lynch capital markets. canadian imperial bank of commerce (canada) -- 10 billion yen of 5.7% bonds due nov. 17, 1992, priced at 101 1/4 to yield 5.75% less full fees, via ltcb international ltd. fees 1 3/8.
the singapore and kuala lumpur stock exchanges are bracing for a turbulent separation, following malaysian finance minister daim zainuddin's long-awaited announcement that the exchanges will sever ties. on friday, datuk daim added spice to an otherwise unremarkable address on malaysia's proposed budget for 1990 by ordering the kuala lumpur stock exchange "to take appropriate action immediately" to cut its links with the stock exchange of singapore. the delisting of malaysian-based companies from the singapore exchange may not be a smooth process, analysts say. though the split has long been expected, the exchanges aren't fully prepared to go their separate ways. the finance minister's order wasn't sparked by a single event and doesn't indicate a souring in relations between the neighboring countries. rather, the two closely linked exchanges have been drifting apart for some years, with a nearly five-year-old moratorium on new dual listings, separate and different listing requirements, differing trading and settlement guidelines and diverging national-policy aims.
quantum chemical corp. 's plant in morris, ill., is expected to resume production in early 1990. the year was misstated in friday's editions. (see: "dividend news: payout stalled at quantum chemical corp. --- firm posts quarterly loss, plans a stock dividend to take place of cash" -- wsj oct. 27, 1989)
italy's trade deficit narrowed to 2.007 trillion lire ($1.49 billion) in september from 2.616 trillion lire a year earlier, the state statistical office istat said. the deficit was 466 billion lire in august. for the first nine months, the trade deficit was 14.933 trillion lire, compared with 10.485 trillion lire in the year-earlier period. istat said the statistics are provisional and aren't seasonally adjusted. imports rose 11% to 18.443 trillion lire in september from a year earlier, while exports rose 17% to 16.436 trillion lire. in the nine months, imports rose 20% to 155.039 trillion lire, while exports grew 18% to 140.106 trillion lire. import values are calculated on a cost, insurance and freight (c.i.f.) basis, while exports are accounted for on a free-on-board (f.o.b.) basis.
general motors corp. 's general counsel hopes to cut the number of outside law firms the auto maker uses from about 700 to 200 within two years. harry j. pearce, named general counsel in may 1987, says the reduction is a cost-cutting measure and an effort to let the no. 1 auto maker's 134-lawyer in-house legal department take on matters it is better equipped and trained to handle. gm trimmed about 40 firms from its approved local counsel list, mr. pearce says. the move is consistent with a trend for corporate legal staffs to do more work in-house, instead of farming it out to law firms. mr. pearce set up gm's first in-house litigation group in may with four lawyers, all former assistant u.s. attorneys with extensive trial experience. he intends to add to the litigation staff. among the types of cases the in-house litigators handle are disputes involving companies doing business with gm and product-related actions, including one in which a driver is suing gm for damages resulting from an accident. mr. pearce has also encouraged his staff to work more closely with gm's technical staffs to help prevent future litigation. gm lawyers have been working with technicians to develop more uniform welding procedures -- the way a vehicle is welded has a lot to do with its durability. the lawyers also monitor suits to identify specific automobile parts that cause the biggest legal problems. mr. pearce says law firms with the best chance of retaining or winning business with gm will be those providing the highest-quality service at the best cost -- echoing similar directives from gm's auto operations to suppliers. this doesn't necessarily mean larger firms have an advantage; mr. pearce said gm works with a number of smaller firms it regards highly. mr. pearce has shaken up gm's legal staff by eliminating all titles and establishing several new functions, including a special-projects group that has made films on safety and drunk driving. federal prosecutors are concluding fewer criminal cases with trials. that's a finding of a new study of the justice department by researchers at syracuse university. david burnham, one of the authors, says fewer trials probably means a growing number of plea bargains. in 1980, 18% of federal prosecutions concluded at trial; in 1987, only 9% did. the study covered 11 major u.s. attorneys' offices -- including those in manhattan and brooklyn, n.y., and new jersey -- from 1980 to 1987. the justice department rejected the implication that its prosecutors are currently more willing to plea bargain. "our felony caseloads have been consistent for 20 years," with about 15% of all prosecutions going to trial, a department spokeswoman said. the discrepancy is somewhat perplexing in that the syracuse researchers said they based their conclusions on government statistics. "one possible explanation for this decline" in taking cases to trial, says mr. burnham, "is that the number of defendants being charged with crimes by all u.s. attorneys has substantially increased." in 1980, the study says, prosecutors surveyed filed charges against 25 defendants for each 100,000 people aged 18 years and older. in 1987, prosecutors filed against 35 defendants for every 100,000 adults. another finding from the study: prosecutors set significantly different priorities. the manhattan u.s. attorney's office stressed criminal cases from 1980 to 1987, averaging 43 for every 100,000 adults. but the new jersey u.s. attorney averaged 16. on the civil side, the manhattan prosecutor filed an average of only 11 cases for every 100,000 adults during the same period; the san francisco u.s. attorney averaged 79. the study is to provide reporters, academic experts and others raw data on which to base further inquiries. imelda marcos asks for dismissal, says she was kidnapped. the former first lady of the philippines, asked a federal court in manhattan to dismiss an indictment against her, claiming among other things, that she was abducted from her homeland. mrs. marcos and her late husband, former philippines president ferdinand marcos, were charged with embezzling more than $100 million from that country and then fraudulently concealing much of the money through purchases of prime real estate in manhattan. mrs. marcos's attorneys asked federal judge john f. keenan to give them access to all u.s. documents about her alleged abduction. the u.s. attorney's office, in documents it filed in response, said mrs. marcos was making the "fanciful -- and factually unsupported -- claim that she was kidnapped into this country" in order to obtain classified material in the case. the office also said mrs. marcos and her husband weren't brought to the u.s. against their will after mr. marcos was ousted as president. the prosecutor quoted statements from the marcoses in which they said they were in this country at the invitation of president reagan and that they were enjoying the hospitality of the u.s. lawyers for mrs. marcos say that because she was taken to the u.s. against her wishes, the federal court lacks jurisdiction in the case. the federal court of appeals in manhattan ruled that the dismissal of a 1980 indictment against former bank of crete owner george koskotas should be reconsidered. the indictment, which was sealed and apparently forgotten by investigators until 1987, charges mr. koskotas and three others with tax fraud and other violations. he made numerous trips to the u.s. in the early 1980s, but wasn't arrested until 1987 when he showed up as a guest of then-vice president george bush at a government function. a federal judge in manhattan threw out the indictment, finding that the seven-year delay violated the defendant's constitutional right to a speedy trial. the appeals court, however, said the judge didn't adequately consider whether the delay would actually hurt the chances of a fair trial. mr. koskotas is fighting extradition proceedings that would return him to greece, where he is charged with embezzling more than $250 million from the bank of crete. his attorney couldn't be reached for comment. pro bono voluntarism: in an effort to stave off a plan that would require all lawyers in new york state to provide twenty hours of free legal aid a year, the state bar recommended an alternative program to increase voluntary participation in pro bono programs. the state bar association's policy making body, the house of delegate, voted saturday to ask chief judge sol wachtler to give the bar's voluntary program three years to prove its effectiveness before considering mandatory pro bono. "we believe our suggested plan is more likely to improve the availability of quality legal service to the poor than is the proposed mandatory pro bono plan and will achieve that objective without the divisiveness, distraction, administrative burdens and possible failure that we fear would accompany an attempt to impose a mandatory plan," said justin l. vigdor of rochester, who headed the bar's pro bono study committee. dallas and houston law firms merge: jackson & walker, a 130-lawyer firm in dallas and datson & scofield, a 70-lawyer firm in houston said they have agreed in principle to merge. the consolidated firm, which would rank among the 10 largest in texas, would operate under the name jackson & walker. the merger must be formally approved by the partners of both firms but is expected to be completed by year end. jackson & walker has an office in fort worth, texas, and dotson & scofield has an office in new orleans. piling on? piggybacking on government assertions that general electric co. may have covered up fraudulent billings to the pentagon, two shareholders have filed a civil racketeering suit against the company. the suit was filed by plaintiffs' securities lawyer richard d. greenfield in u.s. district court in philadelphia. he seeks damages from the company's 15 directors on grounds that they either "participated in or condoned the illegal acts . . . or utterly failed to carry out their duties as directors." ge is defending itself against government criminal charges of fraud and false claims in connection with a logistics-computer contract for the army. the trial begins today in federal court in philadelphia. the government's assertions of the cover-up were made in last minute pretrial motions. ge, which vehemently denies the government's allegations, denounced mr. greenfield's suit. "it is a cheap-shot suit -- procedurally defective and thoroughly fallacious -- which was hurriedly filed by a contingency-fee lawyer as a result of newspaper reports," said a ge spokeswoman. she added that the company was considering bringing sanctions against mr. greenfield for making "grossly inaccurate and unsupported allegations."
the head of the nation's largest car-dealers group is telling dealers to "just say no" when auto makers pressure them to stockpile cars on their lots. in an open letter that will run today in the trade journal automotive news, ron tonkin, president of the national car dealers association, says dealers should cut their inventories to no more than half the level traditionally considered desirable. mr. tonkin, who has been feuding with the big three since he took office earlier this year, said that with half of the nation's dealers losing money or breaking even, it was time for "emergency action." u.s. car dealers had an average of 59 days' supply of cars in their lots at the end of september, according to ward's automotive reports. but mr. tonkin said dealers should slash stocks to between 15 and 30 days to reduce the costs of financing inventory. his message is getting a chilly reception in detroit, where the big three auto makers are already being forced to close plants because of soft sales and reduced dealer orders. even before mr. tonkin's broadside, some large dealers said they were cutting inventories. ford motor co. and chrysler corp. representatives criticized mr. tonkin's plan as unworkable. it "is going to sound neat to the dealer except when his 15-day car supply doesn't include the bright red one that the lady wants to buy and she goes up the street to buy one," a chrysler spokesman said.
southern co. 's gulf power co. unit may plead guilty this week to charges that it illegally steered company money to politicians through outside vendors, according to individuals close to an investigation of the utility holding company. the tentative settlement between gulf power, a pensacola, fla., electric company, and federal prosecutors would mark the end of one part of a wide-ranging inquiry of southern co. in the past year. a grand jury has been investigating whether officials at southern co. conspired to cover up their accounting for spare parts to evade federal income taxes. the grand jury has also been investigating whether gulf power executives violated the federal utility holding company act, which prohibits certain utilities from making political contributions. the individuals said gulf power and federal prosecutors are considering a settlement under which the company would plead guilty to two felony charges and pay fines totaling between $500,000 and $1.5 million. under one count, gulf power would plead guilty to conspiring to violate the utility holding company act. under the second count, the company would plead guilty to conspiring to evade taxes. the guilty pleas would be made solely by gulf power, the individuals said. no employee or vendor would be involved. a spokesman for southern co. would say only that discussions are continuing between gulf power and federal prosecutors. "we have no further developments to report," he said. officials at gulf power couldn't be reached for comment. and prosecutors declined to comment. while southern co. has been reluctant to discuss the grand jury investigations, edward l. addison, chief executive officer, has said the company is prepared to defend its tax and acccounting practices if any charges are brought against it. morever, mr. addison has said southern co. and its units don't condone illegal political contributions. neither mr. addison nor any other southern co. official has been charged with any wrongdoing in connection with the current inquiries. the probe of southern co. has attracted considerable attention this year because of several events that have befallen the company, including the death of a gulf power executive in a plane crash and the disappearance of a company vendor who was to be a key grand jury witness. witnesses have said the grand jury has asked numerous questions about jacob f. "jake" horton, the senior vice president of gulf power who died in the plane crash in april. mr. horton oversaw gulf power's governmental-affairs efforts. on the morning of the crash, he had been put on notice that an audit committee was recommending his dismissal because of invoicing irregularities in a company audit. investigators have been trying to determine whether the crash was an accident, sabotage or suicide. gulf power said in may that an internal audit had disclosed that at least one vendor had used false invoices to fund political causes. but the company said the political contributions had been made more than five years ago.
exxon corp. is resigning from the national wildlife federation's corporate advisory panel, saying the conservation group has been unfairly critical of the exxon valdez oil spill along the alaskan coast. the federation said friday that it regrets the resignation, but issued a stinging response that called exxon a "corporate pariah" that should keep an open dialogue with environmentalists. the federation, with 5.8 million members nationwide, has been one of the sharpest critics of exxon's handling of the 11 million gallon tanker spill and has accused the company of repeatedly ignoring requests to meet and discuss it. the march 24 oil spill soiled hundreds of miles of shoreline along alaska's southern coast and wreaked havoc with wildlife and the fishing industry. exxon's exxon usa unit was one of the charter members of the corporate conservation council, a panel of executives formed in 1982 by the national wildlife federation to foster "frank and open discussions" between industry and the federation's leaders. in a letter to the federation, raymond campion, exxon's environmental coordinator, said: "recent public actions by you regarding the valdez oil spill have failed to demonstrate any sense of objectivity or fairness." the federation was among the plaintiffs in a lawsuit filed in august against exxon seeking full payment of environmental recovery costs from the spill.
first tennessee national corp. said it would take a $4 million charge in the fourth quarter, as a result of plans to expand its systems operation. the banking company said it reached an agreement in principle with international business machines corp. on a systems operations contract calling for ibm to operate first tennessee's computer and telecommunications functions. further, under the agreement, first tennesse would continue to develop the software that creates customer products and sevices. "because personal computers will soon be on the desks of all of our tellers, and customer service and loan representatives, information will be instantly available to help customers with product decisions and provide them with information about their accounts," according to john kelley, executive vice president and corporate services group manager at first tennessee. however, about 120 employees will be affected by the agreement. first tennessee, assisted by ibm, said it will attempt to place the employees within the company, ibm or other companies in memphis. the process will take as many as six months to complete, the company said. the agreement is subject to the banking company's board approval, which is expected next month.
the treasury department said the u.s. trade deficit may worsen next year, after two years of significant improvement. in its report to congress on international economic policies, the treasury said that any improvement in the broadest measure of trade, known as the current account, "is likely at best to be very modest," and "the possibility of deterioration in the current account next year cannot be excluded." the statement was the u.s. government's first acknowledgement of what other groups, such as the international monetary fund, have been predicting for months. continued strength in the dollar was cited as one reason the trade position may deteriorate. the treasury's report, which is required annually by a provision of the 1988 trade act, again took south korea to task for its exchange-rate policies. "we believe that there have continued to be indications of exchange-rate `manipulation'" during the past six months, it said, citing the lack of market forces in south korea's exchange-rate system and the use of capital and interest-rate controls to manipulate exchange rates. the treasury expressed pleasure, however, with the government of taiwan, which was cited for exchange-rate manipulation in last year's report. the treasury said taiwan has liberalized its exchange rate system in the past year.
costa rica reached an agreement with its creditor banks that is expected to cut that government's $1.8 billion in bank debt by as much as 60%. the agreement was announced by costa rican president oscar arias friday, as president bush and other leaders from the western hemisphere gathered in the central american nation for a celebration of democracy. costa rica had been negotiating with the u.s. and other banks for three years, but the debt plan was rushed to completion in order to be announced at the meeting. the government had fallen $300 million behind in interest payments. treasury secretary nicholas brady called the agreement "an important step forward in the strengthened debt strategy," noting that it will "when implemented, provide significant reduction in the level of debt and debt service owed by costa rica." under the plan, costa rica will buy back roughly 60% of its bank debt outstanding at a deeply discounted price, according to officials involved in the agreement. the remainder of the debt will be exchanged for new costa rican bonds with a 6 1/4% interest rate. the international monetary fund and the world bank are expected to provide approximately $180 million to help support the deal, and additional funds are expected from japan. treasury officials say the costa rican agreement demonstrates that the brady debt plan can benefit small debtor countries as well as big debtors, such as mexico.
the treasury said it plans to sell $2 billion of 51-day cash-management bills today, raising all new cash. the bills will be dated oct. 31 and will mature dec. 21, no non-competitive tenders will be accepted. tenders, available in minimum denominations of $1 million, must be received by noon est today at federal reserve banks or branches. the treasury also announced details of this week's unusual bill auction, which has been changed to accommodate the expiration of the federal debt ceiling at midnight tomorrow. the 13-week and 27-week bills will be issued tomorrow rather than thursday, nov. 2, as originally planned. the three-month bills will still mature feb. 1, 1990, and the six-month bills on may 3, 1990. the treasury also said noncompetitive tenders will be considered timely if postmarked no later than sunday, oct. 29, and received no later than tomorrow. the treasury said it won't be able to honor reinvestment requests from holders of bills maturing nov. 2 held in the treasury's book-entry system. the department will make payment for bills maturing on nov. 2 to all investors who have requested reinvestment of their bills on that date, as well as to all account holders who have previously requested payment.
american pioneer inc. said it agreed in principle to sell its american pioneer life insurance co. subsidiary to harcourt brace jovanovich inc. 's hbj insurance cos. for $27 million. american pioneer, parent of american pioneer savings bank, said the sale will add capital and reduce the level of investments in subsidiaries for the thrift holding company. recently, the boards of both the parent company and the thrift also voted to suspend dividends on preferred shares of both companies and convert all preferred into common shares. the company said the move was necessary to meet capital requirements. the transaction is subject to execution of a definitive purchase agreement and approval by various regulatory agencies, including the insurance departments of the states of florida and indiana, the company said. in the second quarter, american pioneer reported a loss of $7.3 million, compared with net income of $1.1 million a year earlier. the banking operation had a loss of $8.7 million in the second quarter, largely because of problem real-estate loans, while the insurance operations earned $884,000.
factory owners are buying new machinery at a good rate this fall, machine tool makers say, but sluggish sales of new cars and trucks raise questions about fourth-quarter demand from the important automotive industry. september orders for machine tools rebounded from the summer doldrums, but remained 7.7% below year-earlier levels, according to figures from nmtba -- the association for manufacturing technology. domestic machine tool plants received $303 million of orders last month, up 33% from august's $227.1 million, but still below the $328.2 million of september 1988, nmtba said. machine tools are complex machines ranging from lathes to metal-forming presses that are used to shape most metal parts. "overall demand still is very respectable," says christopher c. cole, group vice president at cincinnati milacron inc., the nation's largest machine tool producer. "the outlook is positive for the intermediate to long term." september orders for all u.s. producers, in fact, were slightly above the monthly average for 1988, a good year for the industry. "aerospace orders are very good," mr. cole says. "and export business is still good. while some automotive programs have been delayed, they haven't been canceled." "september was one of the biggest order months in our history," says james r. roberts, vice president, world-wide sales and marketing, for giddings & lewis inc., fond du lac, wis. at a recent meeting of manufacturing executives, "everybody i talked with was very positive," he says. most say they plan to spend more on factory equipment in 1990 than in 1989. but sales of north american-made 1990-model cars are running at an annual rate of only six million, down from 7.1 million a year earlier. and truck sales also are off more than 20%. auto makers, who began deferring some equipment purchases last spring, can be expected to remain cautious about spending if their sales don't pick up, machine tool builders say. machine tool executives are hopeful, however, that recent developments in eastern europe will expand markets for u.s.-made machine tools in that region. there is demand for state-of-the-art machine tools in the soviet union and in other eastern european countries as those nations strive to improve the efficiency of their ailing factories as well as the quality of their goods. however, there's a continuing dispute between machine tool makers and the defense department over whether sophisticated u.s. machine tools would increase the soviet union's military might. "the commerce department says go, and the defense department says stop," complains one machine tool producer. if that controversy continues, u.s. machine tool makers say, west german and other foreign producers are likely to grab most of the sales in eastern europe. september orders for machining centers, lathes, milling machines, grinders, boring mills and other machines that shape metal by cutting totaled $192.9 million, down 28% from $266.5 million a year earlier, but a 23% increase from august's $156.3 million, nmtba said. orders last month for metal-forming presses and other machinery to form metal with pressure surged to $110.1 million, a 78% rise from $61.7 million a year earlier and a 55% gain from $70.9 million in august. today's presses are large and costly machines, and a few orders can produce a high total for one month that doesn't necessarily indicate a trend. machine tool shipments last month were $281.2 million, a 24% rise from a year earlier and a 25% increase from august. shipments have run well ahead of 1988 all year, as machine tool builders produce against relatively good backlogs. u.s. producers had a $2.15 billion backlog of unfilled orders at the end of september. that was up 2.8% from a year earlier, even though orders for the first nine months of 1989 were down 19% from the comparable 1988 period. $2,057,750,000. $675,400,000. $1,048,500,000. $588,350,000.
in bombay stock market circles, the buzzword is "mega." at least 40 companies are coming to the capital market to raise $6 billion, an amount never thought possible in india. "when they talk mega-issues, they're truly talking mega," says s.a. dave, chairman of the securities and exchange board of india. "the capital market is booming." but the mega-issues are raising megaquestions about the rapidly evolving indian capital market. one is whether there is enough money to fund the new issues without depressing stock trading. moreover, in the relatively unregulated indian stock markets, investors frequently don't know what they are getting when they subscribe to an issue. a prospectus in india doesn't always tell a potential investor much. some of the large amounts are being raised by small firms. in addition, once money is raised, investors usually have no way of knowing how it is spent. some analysts are concerned that the mega-issues, in such an unregulated environment, could lead to a mega-crash. "the rate of failures will be much more than the rate of successes in the mega-projects," says g.s. patel, a former chairman of the giant, government-run mutual fund, the unit trust of india. "they're going to have mega-problems." the indian stock markets have been on a five-year high, with dips and corrections, since prime minister rajiv gandhi started liberalizing industry. but the last stock market boom, in 1986, seems small compared with the current rush to market. the $6 billion that some 40 companies are looking to raise in the year ending march 31 compares with only $2.7 billion raised on the capital market in the previous fiscal year. in fiscal 1984, before mr. gandhi came to power, only $810 million was raised. this year's biggest issue, $570 million of convertible debentures by engineering company larsen & toubro ltd., is the largest in indian history. and it isn't the only giant issue: together, the top four issues will raise $1.3 billion. convertible debentures -- bonds that can later be converted into equity shares -- are the most popular instrument this year, though many companies are also selling nonconvertible bonds or equity shares. these mega-issues are being propelled by two factors, economic and political. in the past, the socialist policies of the government strictly limited the size of new steel mills, petrochemical plants, car factories and other industrial concerns to conserve resources and restrict the profits businessmen could make. as a result, industry operated out of small, expensive, highly inefficient industrial units. when mr. gandhi came to power, he ushered in new rules for business. he said industry should build plants on the same scale as those outside india and benefit from economies of scale. if the output was too great for the domestic market, he said, companies should export. india's overregulated businessmen had to be persuaded, but they have started to think big. some of the projects being funded by the new issues are the first fruits of mr. gandhi's policy, and they require more capital than the smaller industrial units built in the past. the industrial revolution has produced an explosion in the capital market, which is a far cheaper source of funds than government-controlled banks, where interest rates for prime borrowers are around 16%. the second factor spurring mega-issues is political. mr. gandhi has called general elections for november, and many businessmen fear that he and his congress (i) party will lose. some companies are raising money in anticipation of a government less predictable than mr. gandhi's, and possibly more restrictive. the buoyant bombay rumor mill also says that some of the money raised in the current spate of issues will be used as campaign donations before the elections. no one admits to anything, but india's industrialists have a history of making under-the-table campaign donations. so far, the mega-issues are a hit with investors. earlier this year, tata iron & steel co. 's offer of $355 million of convertible debentures was oversubscribed. essar gujarat ltd., a marine construction company, had similar success with a slightly smaller issue. larsen & toubro started accepting applications for its giant issue earlier this month; bankers and analysts expect it to be oversubscribed. still to come are big issues by bindal agro chem ltd., a petrochemical and agrochemical company, and usha rectifier corp. (india), a semiconductor maker. while many investors are selling parts of their portfolios to buy the new issues, prices on india's 16 stock exchanges are holding up so far. "i don't think it will lead to any chaos in the secondary market," says mr. patel, "only a sagging tendency." says m.j. pherwani, chairman of the unit trust of india: the "markets are headed for growth unheard of and unseen before." but with growth come growing pains, and never has this been clearer on the indian capital market than now. in the past, the government controlled the markets indirectly, through its tight grip on industry itself. various ministries decided the products businessmen could produce and how much; and government-owned banks controlled the financing of projects and monitored whether companies came through on promised plans. the government has been content with this far-reaching, subtle form of control, exercised on a case-by-case basis with no clear rules or guidelines. but now, with large amounts being raised from investors, the government's dawdling on regulation and disclosure requirements has a more dangerous aspect. the securities and exchange board of india was set up earlier this year, along the lines of the u.s. securities and exchange commission, but new delhi hasn't pushed the legislation to make it operational. mr. dave, its head, acts cheery and patient, but he makes no bones about the need to get to work. "mega or non-mega, we feel the prospectus standards need to be considerably improved," he says. "disclosures are very poor in india." he says the big questions -- "do you really need this much money to put up these investments? have you told investors what is happening in your sector? what about your track record? -- " aren't asked of companies coming to market. instead, he says, most investors have to rely on the rumor-happy indian press. an example is the biggest offering of them all, larsen & toubro's $570 million bond issue. the engineering company was acquired in a takeover earlier this year by the giant reliance textile group. although larsen & toubro hadn't raised money from the public in 38 years, its new owners frequently raise funds on the local market. (reliance floated a $357 million petrochemical company in 1988 that was, at the time, the largest public issue in indian history.) the media has raised questions about larsen & toubro's issue, pointing out that it exceeds the company's annual sales and its market capitalization. even stranger is the case of usha rectifier, a semiconductor company with 1988 sales of $28 million that's raising $270 million to build an iron plant. once the money is raised, it isn't always certain how it is used. larsen & toubro, for example, says it's raising $570 million to use as supplier credit on large engineering jobs. unlike other companies, it hasn't pin-pointed specific projects for the funds. and even when specific projects are described in prospectuses, the money often is used elsewhere, according to analysts. "someone must monitor where the funds are deployed," says mr. dave. mr. patel agrees: "there is no proper monitoring and screening of the use of these funds. they're trying to plug the various loopholes, but they're totally unprepared for this." because of the large amounts of money being raised, the loose disclosure requirements and the casual monitoring of how the money is used, some analysts fear that there could be a few mega-crashes, which could hurt market confidence far more than the small bankruptcies that followed the boom of 1986. the government insists that such a possibility is low. it says that despite loose regulation of the market itself, its longstanding regulation of industry will prevent such crashes. t.t. ram mohan contributed to this article.
lion nathan ltd., a new zealand brewing and retail concern, said friday that bond corp. holdings ltd. is "committed" to a transaction whereby lion nathan would acquire 50% of bond's australian brewing assets. lion nathan issued a statement saying it is applying to australia's national companies & securities commission, the nation's corporate watchdog agency, for a modification to takeover regulations "similar to that obtained by" s.a. brewing holdings ltd. sa brewing, an australian brewer, last thursday was given approval to acquire an option for up to 20% of bell resources ltd., a unit of bond corp. bell resources is acquiring bond's brewing businesses for 2.5 billion australian dollars (us$1.9 billion). s.a. brewing would make a takeover offer for all of bell resources if it exercises the option, according to the commission. bond corp., a brewing, property, media and resources company, is selling many of its assets to reduce its debts. "lion nathan has a concluded contract with bond and bell resources," said douglas myers, chief executive of lion nathan.
finnair, finland's state-owned airline, joined the wave of global airline alliances and signed a wide-ranging cooperation agreement with archrival scandinavian airlines system. under the accord, finnair agreed to coordinate flights, marketing and other functions with sas, the 50%-state-owned airline of denmark, norway and sweden. the pact also calls for coordination between finnair and switzerland's national carrier, swissair, with which sas entered a similar alliance last month. finnair and sas said they plan to swap stakes in each other. neither disclosed details pending board meetings next month. officials hinted, however, that sas would take a stake of at least 6% in finnair, valued at about $40 million at current market prices. finnair would receive sas shares valued at the same amount, officials said.
these are the last words abbie hoffman ever uttered, more or less, before he killed himself. and you are there, sort of: abbie: "i'm ok, jack. i'm ok." (listening) "yeah. i'm out of bed. i got my feet on the floor. yeah. two feet. i'll see you wednesday? . . . thursday." he listens impassively. abbie (cont'd.): "i'll always be with you, jack. don't worry." abbie lies back and leaves the frame empty. of course that wasn't the actual conversation the late anti-war activist, protest leader and founder of the yippies ever had with his brother. it's a script pieced together from interviews by cbs news for a re-enactment, a dramatic rendering by an actor of mr. hoffman's ultimately unsuccessful struggle with depression. the segment is soon to be broadcast on the cbs news series "saturday night with connie chung," thus further blurring the distinction between fiction and reality in tv news. it is the new journalism come to television. ms. chung's program is just one of several network shows (and many more in syndication) that rely on the controversial technique of reconstructing events, using actors who are supposed to resemble real people, living and dead. ms. chung's, however, is said to be the only network news program in history to employ casting directors. abbie hoffman in this case is to be played by hollywood actor paul lieber, who isn't new to the character. he was mr. hoffman in a 1979 los angeles production of a play called "the chicago conspiracy trial." television news, of course, has always been part show-biz. broadcasters have a healthy appreciation of the role entertainment values play in captivating an audience. but, as cbs broadcast group president howard stringer puts it, the network now needs to "broaden the horizons of nonfiction television, and that includes some experimentation." since its premiere sept. 16, the show on which ms. chung appears has used an actor to portray the rev. vernon johns, a civil-rights leader, and one to play a teenage drug dealer. it has depicted the bombing of pan am flight 103 over the scottish town of lockerbie. on oct. 21, it did a rendition of the kidnapping and imprisonment of associated press correspondent terry anderson, who was abducted in march 1985 and is believed to be held in lebanon. the production had actors playing mr. anderson and former hostages david jacobsen, the rev. benjamin weir and father lawrence jenco. abc news has similarly branched out into entertainment gimmickry. "prime time live," a new show this season featuring sam donaldson and diane sawyer, has a studio audience that applauds and that one night (to the embarrassment of the network) waved at the camera like the crowd on "let's make a deal." (abc stops short of using an "applause" sign and a comic to warm up the audience. the stars do that themselves.) nbc news has produced three episodes of an occasional series produced by sid feders called "yesterday, today and tomorrow," starring maria shriver, chuck scarborough and mary alice williams, that also gives work to actors. call it a fad. or call it the wave of the future. nbc's re-creations are produced by cosgrove-meurer productions, which also makes the successful prime-time nbc entertainment series "unsolved mysteries." the marriage of news and theater, if not exactly inevitable, has been consummated nonetheless. news programs, particularly if they score well in the ratings, appeal to the networks' cost-conscious corporate parents because they are so much less expensive to produce than an entertainment show is -- somewhere between $400,000 and $500,000 for a one-hour program. entertainment shows tend to cost twice that. re-enactments have been used successfully for several seasons on such syndicated "tabloid tv" shows as "a current affair," which is produced by the fox broadcasting co. unit of rupert murdoch's news corp. that show, whose host is ms. chung's husband, maury povich, has a particular penchant for grisly murders and stories having to do with sex -- the robert chambers murder case, the rob lowe tapes, what have you. gerald stone, the executive producer of "a current affair," says, "we have opened eyes to being a little less conservative and more imaginative in how to present the news." nowhere have eyes been opened wider than at cbs news. at 555 w. 57th st. in manhattan, one floor below the offices of "60 minutes," the most successful prime-time news program ever, actors wait in the reception area to audition for "saturday night with connie chung." cbs news sends scripts to agents, who pass them along to clients. the network deals a lot with unknowns, including scott wentworth, who portrayed mr. anderson, and bill alton as father jenco, but the network has some big names to contend with, too. james earl jones is cast to play the rev. mr. johns. ned beatty may portray former california gov. pat brown in a forthcoming epsiode on caryl chessman, the last man to be executed in california, in 1960. "saturday night" has cast actors to appear in future stories ranging from the abortion rights of teen-agers to a nov. 4 segment on a man named willie bosket, who calls himself a "monster" and is reputed to be the toughest prisoner in new york. cbs news, which as recently as two years ago fired hundreds of its employees in budget cutbacks, now hires featured actors beginning at $2,700 a week. that isn't much compared with what bill cosby makes, or even connie chung for that matter (who is paid $1.6 million a year and who recently did a guest shot of her own on the sitcom "murphy brown"). but the money isn't peanuts either, particularly for a news program. cbs news is also re-enacting the 1979 three mile island nuclear accident in middletown, pa., with something less than a cast of thousands. it is combing the town of 10,000 for about 200 extras. on oct. 20, the town's mayor, robert reid, made an announcement on behalf of cbs during half-time at the middletown high school football game asking for volunteers. "there was a roll of laughter through the stands," says joe sukle, the editor of the weekly press and journal in middletown. "they're filming right now at the bank down the street, and they want shots of people getting out of cars and kids on skateboards. they are approaching everyone on the street and asking if they want to be in a docudrama." mr. sukle says he wouldn't dream of participating himself: "no way. i think re-enactments stink." though a re-enactment may have the flavor, hollywood on the hudson it isn't. some producers seem tentative about the technique, squeamish even. so the results, while not news, aren't exactly theater either, at least not good theater. and some people do think that acting out scripts isn't worthy of cbs news, which once lent prestige to the network and set standards for the industry. in his review of "saturday night with connie chung," tom shales, the tv critic of the washington post and generally an admirer of cbs, wrote that while the show is "impressive, . . . one has to wonder if this is the proper direction for a network news division to take." re-creating events has, in general, upset news traditionalists, including former cbs news president richard s. salant and former nbc news president reuven frank, former cbs news anchorman walter cronkite and the new dean of the columbia university graduate school of journalism, joan konner. says she: "once you add dramatizations, it's no longer news, it's drama, and that has no place on a network news broadcast. . . . they should never be on. never." criticism of the abbie hoffman segment is particularly scathing among people who knew and loved the man. that includes his companion of 15 years, johanna lawrenson, as well as his former wife, anita. both women say they also find it distasteful that cbs news is apparently concentrating on mr. hoffman's problems as a manic-depressive. "this is dangerous and misrepresents abbie's life," says ms. lawrenson, who has had an advance look at the 36-page script. "it's a sensational piece about someone who is not here to defend himself." mrs. hoffman says that dramatization "makes the truth flexible. it takes one person's account and gives it authenticity." cbs news interviewed jack hoffman and his sister, phyllis, as well as mr. hoffman's landlord in solebury township, pa. also jonathan silvers, who collaborated with mr. hoffman on two books. mr. silvers says, "i wanted to be interviewed to get abbie's story out, and maybe talking about the illness will do some good." the executive producer of "saturday night with connie chung," andrew lack, declines to discuss re-creactions as a practice or his show, in particular. "i don't talk about my work," he says. the president of cbs news, david w. burke, didn't return numerous telephone calls. one person close to the process says it would not be in the best interest of cbs news to comment on a "work in progress," such as the hoffman re-creation, but says cbs news is "aware" of the concerns of ms. lawrenson and mr. hoffman's former wife. neither woman was invited by cbs news to participate in a round-table discussion about mr. hoffman that is to follow the re-enactment. mr. lieber, the actor who plays mr. hoffman, says he was concerned at first that the script would "misrepresent an astute political mind, one that i admired," but that his concerns were allayed. the producers, he says, did a good job of depicting someone "who had done so much, but who was also a manic-depressive."
dentsu inc., the world's largest advertising agency on the strength of its dominance in the japanese market, is setting its sights on overseas expansion. last year, dentsu started hdm, a joint network with u.s. ad agency young & rubicam and eurocom of france. a few months ago, dentsu acquired 69% of australian agency fortune communication holdings ltd. for 5.9 million australian dollars (us$4.6 million). dentsu has u.s. subsidiaries, but they keep low profiles. now, the giant marketing company, which holds 25% of japan's 4.4 trillion yen ($30.96 billion) advertising industry, is considering the acquisition of an advertising network in the u.s. or europe. what is driving dentsu's international expansion largely is the need to keep up with its japanese clients as they grow in the u.s. and europe. "if we don't do something . . . we won't be able to catch up with demand," says a dentsu spokesman. "our president said acquisition is an effective method." last year, dentsu's foreign business accounted for less than 10% of total billings, but the company is aiming at 20% in the near future. so far, it appears cautious about taking the big step. for example, the spokesman says dentsu has been approached by banks and securities companies a number of times to invest in the troubled british marketing group saatchi & saatchi plc. but he said dentsu hasn't looked seriously at saatchi. though dentsu says it has no concrete acquisition plans or deadlines, it is laying the groundwork for international growth. it is setting up a special team in charge of international markets and training workers to do business abroad. for the year ended march 31, dentsu sales rose 19% to $8.9 billion from $7.5 billion, and net income jumped 59% to $102 million from $64 million. dentsu's billings last year were larger than those of young & rubicam, the world's second-largest ad agency, according to a survey by the publication advertising age. but success overseas in unfamiliar markets could be trickier than for other industries such as manufacturers. on its own, dentsu's muscle in japan may count for little in major foreign markets when seeking non-japanese clients. thus, an acquisition may prove the necessary course. but japanese agencies are cautious about expanding abroad because client relationships are different. japanese agencies do business with rival clients in the same industry, a practice "that would be unacceptable by traditional western conflict rules," says roy warman, the london chief executive of saatchi & saatchi's communications division. although acquiring a foreign company would expand japanese advertising agencies' business to foreign clients, many clients would also be japanese companies expanding overseas, says the dentsu spokesman. but the different business system would make it hard for dentsu to provide these japanese companies the same kind of services they do in japan.
ciba-geigy ag, the big swiss chemicals company, said that it agreed in a letter of intent with corning inc. to acquire corning's 50% share of ciba corning diagnostics corp., based in medfield, mass. ciba corning, which had been a 50-50 venture between basel-based ciba-geigy and corning, has annual sales of about $300 million, the announcement said. terms of the transaction weren't disclosed. ciba corning makes clinical diagnostics systems and related products for the medical-care industry. the announcement said the acquisition should be completed by december after a definitive agreement is completed and regulatory approval is received. ciba-geigy intends to develop the ciba corning unit into a "substantial business, " making the unit an "integral part" of ciba-geigy's "comprehensive disease management concept."
the nbc network canceled its first new series of the fall tv season, killing mel brooks's wacky hotel comedy "the nutt house." the show, one of five new nbc series, is the second casualty of the three networks so far this fall. last week cbs inc. canceled "the people next door." nbc's comedy had aired wednesdays at 9:30 p.m. and in five outings had drawn an average of only 13.2% of homes, lagging behind the jamie lee curtis comedy "anything but love" on abc and cbs's one-hour drama "jake and the fatman." nbc, a unit of general electric co., hasn't decided on a permanent replacement for the canceled series.
john labatt ltd. said it plans a private placement of 150 million canadian dollars (us$127.5 million) in preferred shares, to be completed around nov. 1. proceeds will be used to reduce short-term debt at the beer and food concern, said robert vaux, vice president, finance. the preferred shares will carry a floating annual dividend equal to 72% of the 30-day bankers' acceptance rate until dec. 31, 1994. thereafter, the rate will be renegotiated. mr. vaux said that if no agreement is reached, other buyers will be sought by bid or auction. the shares are redeemable after the end of 1994. mr. vaux said the share issue is part of a strategy to strengthen labatt's balance sheet in anticipation of acquisitions to be made during the next 12 to 18 months. labatt's has no takeover bids outstanding currently, he said. lead underwriter to the issue is toronto dominion securities inc.
texas instruments inc., once a pioneer in portable computer technology, today will make a bid to reassert itself in that business by unveiling three small personal computers. the announcements are scheduled to be made in temple, texas, and include a so-called "notebook" pc that weighs less than seven pounds, has a built-in hard disk drive and is powered by intel corp. 's 286 microprocessor. that introduction comes only two weeks after compaq computer corp., believing it had a lead of three to six months on competitors, introduced the first u.s. notebook computer with such features. despite the inevitable comparison with compaq, however, texas instruments' new notebook won't be a direct competitor. while compaq sells its machines to businesses through computer retailers, texas instruments will be selling most of its machines to the industrial market and to value-added resellers and original-equipment manufacturers. the introductions also mark texas instruments' plunge back into a technology it has all but ignored for the past several years. although the dallas-based computer giant introduced the first portable data terminal in 1971 -- a 38-pound monster -- and the world's first microprocessor-based portable in 1976, the only portable machines it has introduced since the first part of the decade have been "dumb" terminals with limited on-board processing ability. it stopped selling a standard personal computer a while ago. now that is about to change, as texas instruments begins marketing two 14-pound laptop pcs with 20 megabyte and 40 megabyte hard drives. the laptops are not revolutionary and, indeed, are tardy in a market first opened by grid systems corp., now a unit of tandy corp., almost two years ago. but the notebook, with the more advanced microprocessor and hard disk, is more innovative. weighing 6.7 pounds with battery, the notebook measures 8.2 by 11.7 inches, has a 20-megabyte hard disk drive and boasts a backlit screen that is 22% larger than compaq's. its keyboard, according to industry consultants, is better than compaq's, but its battery life of two to three hours is shorter. it doesn't have an internal floppy disk drive, although a snap-on drive can be purchased separately. its greatest drawback may be its 3-inch thickness, big enough for one consultant to describe it as "clunky." list prices on the heavier texas instrument laptops will be $4,999 for the ti model 25, with a 20 megabyte disk drive, and $5,599 for the 40-megabyte model 45. the notebook, the ti model 12, will be priced at $4,199.
shearson lehman hutton inc. said it applied to taiwanese securities officials for permission to open brokerage offices in taipei. shearson's application is the first since the taiwan securities and exchange commission announced june 21 that it would allow foreign brokerage firms to do business in that country. taiwan officials are expected to review the shearson application later this year. under current rules, investors in taiwan can buy overseas stocks only through the purchase of mutual funds issued by local and foreign investment trusts. the new rules will allow investors to buy foreign stocks directly. a spokesman for shearson said the brokerage service will be directed at individual investors who want to buy foreign and domestic stocks. "it's an attractive market with good growth opportunities," he added.
retailers in the west and parts of the south are entering the critical christmas shopping season with more momentum than those in other regions. in a new report, the international council of shopping centers said sales of general merchandise in the west for the first seven months of 1989 rose 6.6% above year-earlier levels. sales increased a more modest 4.8% in the south and 4.4% in the midwest. but sales in the oil-patch state of texas surged 12.9% and sales in south carolina jumped 10.6% in the period, the new york trade group said. in the northeast, however, sales declined 0.4% in the period, with sales in new england falling 2.6%. the numbers show that "we don't have a monolithic economy," said isaac lagnado, council research director. "there are a lot of have and have-not markets." sales nationally rose 3.9% through july, the latest month for which the figures are available, the council said. the northern california earthquake and hurricane hugo are likely to temporarily damp sales growth in the west and south carolina. but mr. lagnado predicted the regional trends would continue through christmas. "the big mo is as much of a factor in retailing as in politics," he said. the christmas quarter is important to retailers because it represents roughly a third of their sales and nearly half of their profits. the council's report is based on data the trade group buys from the u.s. census bureau. the information on 125 metropolitan markets is supplied by retailers such as sears, roebuck & co. and k mart corp. as well as closely held concerns such as r.h. macy & co. the council plans to release its regional reports monthly. mr. lagnado said strength in employment appears to have the biggest impact on sales growth. el paso, austin and fort worth, the three strongest retail markets in the nation, are all located in texas, where employment grew a relatively strong 2%. massachusetts, which has lost jobs in the computer and defense-related industries, was the weakest link in bleak new england. the results reflect a reversal in the fortunes of the regions during the past two years. in 1987, the west had the slowest sales growth, and the south and the midwest were first and second respectively, according to the council. mr. lagnado said that although retailers probably won't ever recover sales lost because of the california quake and hurricane hugo, they could see some benefits later on. stores such as sears that sell big-ticket durable goods might actually get a boost as consumers rush to replace items lost in the disasters, he said.
kerr-mcgee corp. said it will spend $42 million to purchase land and relocate its ammonium perchlorate storage facility to clark county, nev., from henderson, nev. the company said it will move the storage and cross-blending operations to a site 23 miles northeast of las vegas to distance the operations from residential areas. ammonium perchlorate is an oxidizer that is mixed with a propellant to make rocket fuel used in the space shuttle and military rockets. in may 1988, an ammonium perchlorate plant in henderson owned by an american pacific corp. unit was leveled by a series of explosions. after the explosion, kerr-mcgee temporarily shut down its facility just south of las vegas for a safety inspection. american pacific and kerr-mcgee are the only two u.s. manufacturers of ammonium perchlorate. when the plant was destroyed, "i think everyone got concerned that the same thing would happen at our plant," a kerrmcgee spokeswoman said. that prompted kerr-mcgee to consider moving the potentially volatile storage facilities and cross-blending operations away from town. kerr-mcgee said it has purchased 3,350 acres from the federal government in clark county and plans to begin construction early next year. the new facility is expected to begin operations in early 1991. the henderson plant will continue its other chemical operations, the company said.
this maker of electronic devices said it replaced all five incumbent directors at a special meeting called by milton b. hollander, whose high technology holding co. of stamford, conn. acquired most of its 49.4% stake in newport in august. elected as directors were mr. hollander, frederick ezekiel, frederick ross, arthur b. crozier and rose pothier. removed from office were george pratt, robert e. davis, norman gray, john virtue, corporate secretary, and barrett b. weekes, chairman, president and chief executive officer. newport officials didn't respond friday to requests to discuss the changes at the company but earlier, mr. weekes had said mr. hollander wanted to have his own team on the board.
shiseido co., japan's leading cosmetics producer, said it had net income of 5.64 billion yen ($39.7 million) in its first half, which ended sept. 30. exact comparisons with the previous year were unavailable because of a change in the company's fiscal calendar. the tokyo-based company had net of 3.73 billion yen in the previous reporting period, which was the four months ended march 31. sales in the first half came to 159.92 billion yen, compared with 104.79 billion yen in the four-month period. shiseido predicted that sales for the year ending next march 31 will be 318 billion yen, compared with 340.83 billion yen in the year ended nov. 30, 1988. it said it expects net to rise to 11 billion yen from 8.22 billion yen.
merger and acquisition activity in the third quarter exceeded the year-earlier pace, said merrill lynch & co. 's w.t. grimm & co. unit in schaumburg, ill. a total of 672 transactions were announced during the latest quarter, up 13% from the year-earlier period's 597, grimm said. transactions in which prices were disclosed totaled $71.9 billion, up 36% from $52.9 billion a year earlier, the company added. grimm counted 16 transactions valued at $1 billion or more in the latest period, twice as many as a year earlier. the largest was the $12 billion merger creating bristol-myers squibb co. in the first nine months, 1,977 transactions were announced, up 15% from 1,716 in the year-earlier period. transactions in which prices were disclosed totaled $188.1 billion, up 15% from $163.2 billion a year earlier. citing current stock market conditions and the trend away from highly leveraged transactions, grimm said it wasn't certain that the total value of transactions for the year will exceed the record $247 billion in 1988.
medicine shoppe international inc. declared a 3-for-2 stock split, and substantially boosted the dividend payout. the franchiser of pharmacies said the added shares will be distributed dec. 4 to stock of record nov. 13. the company also changed its dividend policy, under which holders had received an annual 10 cents-a-share payment, by declaring a four-cents-a-share dividend, to be paid quarterly on post-split shares.
nbi inc. said that it cannot pay the oct. 31 dividend on its series a convertible preferred stock, allowing the stock's holder to convert the shares into as much as 27.7% of nbi's shares outstanding. nbi said that it has the funds to pay the dividend, but that it doesn't have the surplus or profit required under delaware law for payment of the dividend. all the preferred stock is held by the yukon office supply stock ownership plan. under terms of the stock, the yukon esop can demand that the stock be redeemed for $4,090,000 on nov. 30, but nbi said it is legally prohibited from making the redemption. failure to pay the dividend allows yukon to convert all or some of its shares into nbi common after nov. 30, at a conversion price based on nbi's closing stock price. nbi, a maker of word-processing systems, said it can't predict if any of the preferred stock will be converted. nbi also said it has hired prudential-bache securities inc. as its financial adviser and investment banker to help it restructure financially and improve its balance sheet.
insurers may see claims resulting from the san francisco earthquake totaling nearly $1 billion -- far less than the claims they face from hurricane hugo -- but the recent spate of catastrophes should jolt property insurance rates in coming months. the property claims service division of the american insurance services group estimated insured losses from the earthquake at $960 million. this estimate doesn't include claims under workers' compensation, life, health disability and liability insurance and damage to infrastructure such as bridges, highways and public buildings. the estimated earthquake losses are low compared with the $4 billion in claims that insurers face from hurricane hugo, which ripped through the caribbean and the carolinas last month. that's because only about 30% of california homes and businesses had earthquake insurance to cover the losses. however, insurance brokers and executives say that the combination of the bay area earthquake, hugo and last week's explosion at the phillips petroleum co. 's refinery in pasadena, texas, will cause property insurance and reinsurance rates to jump. other insurance rates such as casualty insurance, which would cover liability claims, aren't likely to firm right away, says alice cornish, an industry analyst with northington research in avon, conn. she believes the impact of losses from these catastrophes isn't likely to halt the growth of the industry's surplus capital next year. property reinsurance rates are likely to climb first, analysts and brokers believe. "the reinsurance market has been bloodied by disasters" in the u.s. as well as in great britain and europe, says thomas rosencrants, director of research at interstate/johnson lane inc. in atlanta. insurers typically retain a small percentage of the risks they underwrite and pass on the rest of the losses. insurers buy this insurance protection for themselves by giving up a portion of the premiums they collect on a policy to another firm -- a reinsurance company, which, in turn, accepts a portion of any losses resulting from this policy. insurers, such as cigna corp., transamerica corp, and aetna life & casualty co., buy reinsurance from other u.s.-based companies and lloyd's of london for one catastrophe at a time. after hugo hit, many insurers exhausted their reinsurance coverage and had to tap reinsurers to replace that coverage in case there were any other major disasters before the end of the year. after the earthquake two weeks ago, brokers say companies scrambled to replace reinsurance coverages again and lloyd's syndicates turned to the london market excess lines for protection of their own. james snedeker, senior vice president of gill & roeser inc., a new york-based reinsurance broker, says insurers who took big losses this fall and had purchased little reinsurance in recent years will be asked to pay some pretty hefty rates if they want to buy reinsurance for 1990. however, companies with few catastrophe losses this year and already big buyers of reinsurance are likely to see their rates remain flat, or perhaps even decline slightly. many companies will be negotiating their 1990 reinsurance contracts in the next few weeks. "it's a seller's market," said mr. snedeker of the reinsurance market right now. but some large insurers, such as state farm mutual automobile insurance co., don't purchase reinsurance, but fund their own program. a few years ago, state farm, the nation's largest home insurer, stopped buying reinsurance because no one carrier could provide all the coverage that it needed and the company found it cheaper to self-reinsure. the $472 million of losses state farm expects from hugo and an additional $300 million from the earthquake are less than 5% of state farm's $16.7 billion total net worth. since few insurers have announced what amount of losses they expect to see from the earthquake, it's impossible to get a clear picture of the quake's impact on fourth-quarter earnings, said herbert goodfriend at prudential-bache securities corp. transamerica expects an after-tax charge of less than $3 million against fourth-quarter net; hartford insurance group, a unit of itt corp., expects a $15 million or 10 cents after-tax charge; and fireman's fund corp. expects a charge of no more than $50 million before taxes and after using its reinsurance.
sharp corp., tokyo, said net income in its first half rose 59% to 18.32 billion yen ($128.9 million) from 11.53 billion yen a year earlier. the consumer electronics, home appliances and information-processing concern said revenue in the six months ended sept. 30 rose 8.9% to 517.85 billion yen from 475.6 billion yen. sales of information-processing products and electric parts increased a strong 22% to 236.23 billion yen from 194.24 billion yen and accounted for 46% of total sales. in audio equipment, sales rose 13% to 44.3 billion yen from 39.19 billion yen. sales of electric appliances were flat, and sales of electronic equipment declined slightly. sharp projected sales for the current year ending march 31 at 1.6 trillion yen, a 7% increase the previous fiscal year. it said it expects net to rise 45% to 380 billion yen.
sun microsystems inc., a computer maker, announced the effectiveness of its registration statement for $125 million of 6 3/8% convertible subordinated debentures due oct. 15, 1999. the company said the debentures are being issued at an issue price of $849 for each $1,000 principal amount and are convertible at any time prior to maturity at a conversion price of $25 a share. the debentures are available through goldman, sachs & co.
nelson holdings international ltd. shareholders approved a 1-for-10 consolidation of the company's common stock at a special meeting. at the same time, shareholders approved the adoption of a rights plan and a super-majority voting approval requirement. they also approved the relocation of the company's registered office to toronto from vancouver and a name change to nhi nelson holdings international ltd. following the consolidation, the entertainment company, which has film and television operations in beverly hills, calif., will have about 4.1 million shares outstanding. the number of authorized common shares will remain at 100 million. under the rights plan, holders will have one right for each common share held, with each right entitling the purchase of one common share for 100 canadian dollars. the rights plan would be triggered if a person or group acquires 20% or more of the common shares outstanding without making an offer to all shareholders. under the super-majority amendment, certain mergers and other transactions would require approval of holders of 80% of the company's common shares outstanding.
wilfred american educational corp. said a federal grand jury in boston indicted the operator of cosmetology and business schools for mail fraud. the charges in the 12-count indictment, which stem from events that allegedly occurred in late 1984 and early 1985, involve enrollment procedures of six students and the preparation of certain reports, wilfred said. no individuals were charged in the indictment. wilfred american said it will "vigorously defend" itself against the charges and added that the charges relate to procedures that it has since changed. eight admissions representatives at two of wilfred's former massachusetts schools previously pleaded guilty to charges of aiding, abetting and counseling students to submit false financial-aid applications. wilfred closed its massachusetts schools earlier this year. in new york stock exchange composite trading friday, wilfred fell 6.25 cents to 93.75 cents a share.
rally's inc. said it filed suit in u.s. district court in delaware against a group led by burt sugarman, seeking to block the investors from buying more shares. rally's, a louisville, ky., fast-food chain, alleges that the three investors, who are directors of the company, broke securities laws because they didn't disclose their intentions to acquire a big rally's stake. the group, led by giant group ltd. and its chairman, mr. sugarman, owns about 45.2% of rally's. in the securities and exchange commission filings, the group has said it may seek control of rally's. mr. sugarman called the lawsuit "not nice" and said his group will continue to push for control of the company and the removal of certain directors. he asserts that some directors, who have joined forces with company founder james patterson, have ties to wendy's, a competing hamburger chain. the patterson group, which controls about 42% of rally's shares, also may seek control. rally's also said it formed a committee of three directors, who aren't associated with either the patterson or sugarman groups, to analyze the situation.
milton petrie, chairman of petrie stores corp., said he has agreed to sell his 15.2% stake in deb shops corp. to petrie stores. in a securities and exchange commission filing, mr. petrie said that on oct. 26 petrie stores agreed to purchase mr. petrie's 2,331,100 deb shops shares. the transaction will take place tomorrow. the filing said petrie stores of secaucus, n.j., is purchasing mr. petrie's deb shops stake as an investment. although petrie stores has considered seeking to acquire the remaining equity of deb stores, it has no current intention to pursue such a possibility, the filing said. philadelphia-based deb shops said it saw little significance in mr. petrie selling his stock to petrie stores. "we didn't look at it and say, `oh my god, something is going to happen, '" said stanley uhr, vice president and corporate counsel. mr. uhr said that mr. petrie or his company have been accumulating deb shops stock for several years, each time issuing a similar regulatory statement. he said no discussions currently are taking place between the two companies.
nikon corp. said unconsolidated pretax profit increased 70% to 12.12 billion yen ($85.3 million) in the first half ended sept. 30, from 7.12 billion yen a year ago. the tokyo camera maker said net income more than doubled to 5.85 billion yen, or 16.08 a share, from 2.63 billion yen, or 7.24 yen a share. nikon said sales rose despite the adverse effect of japan's unpopular consumption tax, introduced in april. increasing personal spending and capital investment are fueling growth, the company said. rising export sales also contributed to strong growth, nikon added. total sales gained 20% to 122.36 billion yen from 102.01 billion yen. exports made up 46.2% of the latest year's total, up from 39.8% a year ago. camera sales showed the strongest gains, rising 37% to 50.59 billion yen. nikon forecast sales for the year ending march 31 will rise 9.6% to 240 billion yen. pretax profit is expected to increase 18% to 22 billion yen and net income is expected to rise 53% to 10.5 billion yen.
presidio oil co. said it signed a definitive agreement to acquire gulf canada resources ltd. 's u.s. unit for $163 million. presidio, a denver oil and gas concern, said it will acquire the properties and operations of home petroleum corp., which includes two regional gas-gathering systems and proved reserves of about nine million barrels of oil and 72 billion cubic feet of natural gas. presidio said the properties are generally situated in wyoming, north dakota, texas, oklahoma and louisiana. gulf canada, calgary, said the transaction is part of its plan to sell non-strategic assets and focus operations on canada, indonesia and other international areas. a spokesman for gulf canada, which is controlled by toronto's reichmann family, said the properties account for about 6% of the company's assets and produce about 5,000 barrels of oil and 35 million cubic feet of gas a day. he said gulf canada will likely report an extraordinary gain from the sale in the fourth quarter, but he wouldn't offer a specific estimate. the transaction is expected to close by nov. 30.
nec corp., a tokyo-based computer and electronics concern, said net income rose 18% to 29.66 billion yen ($208.7 million) in the fiscal first half, ended sept. 30, from 25.12 billion yen a year earlier. sales rose 7.4% to 1.255 trillion yen from 1.168 trillion yen. nec said first-half computer sales totaled 555.5 billion yen, up 11% from 500.26 billion yen a year earlier. sales of electrical devices rose 13% to 283.8 billion yen from 251.8 billion yen. it said sales of home electronic products advanced 3.7% to 44.92 billion yen from 43.34 billion yen. in the period just ended, computers accounted for 44% of total sales, nec said, and electrical devices made up 23%. nec forecast sales for the year ending next march 31 of 2.74 trillion yen, an increase of 27% from the previous fiscal year. it said net income will rise 25% to 69 billion yen.
montedison s.p. a. definitively agreed to buy all of the publicly held shares of erbamont n.v. for $37 each. montedison now owns about 72% of erbamont's shares outstanding. the companies said the accord was unanimously approved by a special committee of erbamont directors unaffiliated with montedison. under the pact, montedision will make a $37-a-share tender offer for erbamont stock outstanding. the tender offer will be followed by the sale of all of erbamont's assets, subject to all of its liabilities, to montedison. erbamont will then be liquidated, with any remaining erbamont holders receiving a distribution of $37 a share. the companies said the transaction is being structured this way because the laws of the netherlands antilles, under which erbamont is organized, don't provide for merger transactions.
a unit of dpc acquisition partners launched a $10-a-share tender offer for the shares outstanding of dataproducts corp., and said it would seek to liquidate the computer-printer maker "as soon as possible," even if a merger isn't consummated. dpc acquisition is controlled by crescott investment associates, wilson investment group, kernel corp. and catalyst partners. the investor group owns 1,534,600 dataproducts common shares, or a 7.6% stake. the offer is based on several conditions, including obtaining financing. dpc acquisition said it had received the reasonable assurance of chase manhattan bank n.a. that the financing can be obtained. in a filing with the securities and exchange commission, dpc acquisition said it expects it will need about $215 million to buy the shares and pay related fees and expenses. dpc acquisition added that it has not begun discussions with financing sources, and said it expected to repay the amounts borrowed through proceeds of the liquidation. dataproducts officials declined to comment, and said they had not yet seen a suit filed in federal court by dpc acquisition that seeks to nullify a standstill agreement between dpc acquisition and dataproducts. earlier this year, dpc acquisition made a $15-a-share offer for dataproducts, which the dataproducts board said it rejected because the $283.7 million offer was not fully financed. dataproducts has since started a restructuring, and has said it is not for sale.
jayark corp. agreed to pay $4 million in cash, $2 million of 12% convertible debentures, and 1.6 million common shares to acquire closely held kofcoh imports inc. in over-the-counter trading friday, jayark was quoted at 87.5 cents bid, down 15.625 cents. at the market price, the transaction has a total indicated value of $7.4 million. kofcoh is a new york holding company for rosalco inc., which imports furniture and other items. david l. koffman, president and chief executive officer of jayark, holds about 40% of kofcoh, jayark said. jayark, new york, distributes and rents audio-visual equipment and prints promotional ads for retailers. in the quarter ended july 31, jayark had an average of 5.6 million shares outstanding. the transaction is subject to approval by a panel of disinterested directors, the company said, adding that shareholder approval isn't needed.
ajinomoto co., a tokyo-based food-processing concern, said net income in its first half rose 8.9% to 8.2 billion yen ($57.7 million) from 7.54 billion yen a year earlier. sales in the six months ended sept. 30 were up 4.5% to 229.03 billion yen from 219.27 billion yen. sales were higher in all of the company's business categories, with the biggest growth coming in sales of foodstuffs such as margarine, coffee and frozen food, which rose 6.3%. oils and fats also did well, posting a 5.3% sales increase. sales in the category that includes pharmaceuticals, amino acids and chemicals rose 4.7%. ajinomoto predicted sales in the current fiscal year ending next march 31 of 480 billion yen, compared with 460.05 billion yen in fiscal 1989. it said it expects full-year net of 16 billion yen, compared with 15 billion yen in the latest year.
the new york mercantile exchange, the world's chief oil futures marketplace, is at a critical juncture. several longtime observers of the commodities industry think the fortunes of the merc over the next decade will be determined to a large extent by how well its new natural gas futures contract does and how successful its new president is in raising the level of compliance by floor traders with exchange and commodity futures trading commission rules. if the exchange falters in these moves, they say, it might once again fall behind its chief new york competitor, the commodity exchange. on friday, the merc's board announced that it had approved sabine pipe line co. 's henry hub in erath, la., as the delivery site for its long-awaited natural gas futures contract. it also said that it would start trading the contract as soon as the cftc approved it. the cftc has 90 days to respond to such applications. the merc first started working on developing this contract in 1984. only three weeks earlier, the merc had turned to one of its own executives, 40-year-old r. patrick thompson, to replace rosemary t. mcfadden as president. mr. thompson is believed to have a mandate from the board of directors to help improve the merc's tarnished reputation as an exchange whose floor traders don't follow the rules very well. ms. mcfadden had been forced out in july in a bitter power struggle with z. lou guttman, chairman and a longtime floor trader on the exchange. mr. guttman told one person familiar with the new york exchanges during the search for a replacement that he was looking for a president who would be "responsive to the needs of the membership and the board." mr. thompson first came to the exchange in 1981 and has been executive vice president since march 1988. he previously held posts of senior vice president of compliance and senior vice president and general counsel. by contrast, the comex in july imported a highly regarded outsider, arnold f. staloff, as its president. mr. staloff, 44, was a senior officer of the philadelphia stock exchange and is considered a specialist in new financial products. mr. thompson isn't bereft of experience with new products, however. for the past two years, he said, he and the exchange's research department have been working on the new natural gas contract, seeking a good delivery site and studying the natural gas market. "our members are eager to begin trading this contract, so we expect no difficulty in attracting locals to the natural gas pit," he said. the educational effort of teaching companies in the natural gas industry how to use the futures to hedge would have to continue for another a year or two, he added. the merc's extremely successful contracts in crude oil, gasoline and heating oil have made it the largest futures exchange in new york, and third behind the chicago board of trade and chicago mercantile exchange. in a recent interview, mr. thompson said the biggest problem facing all commodity exchanges was one of image. earlier this year, the u.s. attorney indicted 45 floor traders and one clerk at the two big chicago exchanges. federal authorities in new york started investigating exchanges in may, though no indictments have been handed down there. so far they have issued scores of subpoenas, some of which went to members of the new york merc. mr. thompson will have to face some of the consequences of those subpoenas. in a recent general accounting office study, the merc was found to have been the most lax in enforcing exchange rules. it levied the smallest number of suspensions of traders and fines of the four largest commodity exchanges studied over the past five years. it also had both the fewest, and least experienced, investigators per million contracts traded. the merc received considerable criticism in 1987 when it was discovered that its compliance director, kevin p. conway, who then was responsible for policing the exchange's busy oil and metal pits, "was engaged in other personal business activities on exchange time," including out-of-state trips, according to a new york merc report prepared last year. mr. conway is no longer at the exchange. "we had a management breakdown in 1987 in terms of compliance," mr. thompson says. "we recognized the problem and took care of it." he says that even if the natural gas contract boosts volume at the exchange strongly, the 1990 business plan calls for having adequate compliance people to ensure that exchange rules are being followed. for years the five new york exchanges have been talking about cooperating in various aspects of their business in order to improve the efficiency of their operations. periodically, there has even been talk of mergers between one or more exchanges. so far there is little to show for such efforts. mr. thompson believes the case for working together is stronger now than ever. "the cost of competition has become extremely high," he says. "we must find ways to save money for the futures commission merchants who do business on our exchanges." he thinks that progress in cooperation can be made in areas where no vested interests have built up. one of those areas is the development of a hand-held electronic device that would permit floor traders to enter trades as they make them. the gao has recommended the creation of a system to record trade data so that an independent, verifiable audit trail can be established to prevent customer fraud. the merc is now cooperating with the comex in developing such a device to provide such an audit trail. the chicago exchanges also are working on such a device. another major electronics problem faces mr. thompson -- the creation of a 24-hour trading system that can be used outside normal trading hours. in january, the new york merc signed a letter of intent with the chicago merc as a preliminary step to joining their electronic system called globex. but in may, the chicago merc said it was looking into creating a common system with the chicago board of trade, and it suspended negotiations with the new york merc. mr. thompson says his exchange isn't waiting for the results of the chicago exchanges' cooperation. it recently began a pilot program to test an electronic trading system called ats/2, the automated trading system created by the international commodities clearing house. looking ahead to commodity markets this week: copper michael frawley, metals trader for painewebber inc. in new york, said there is good technical support between $1.10 and $1.12 a pound for december copper, which ended friday at $1.1580 a pound, up 1.6 cents. he views the $1.10 to $1.12 range as a buying opportunity and considers the market oversold. "i think the market could pop up to the $1.22 to $1.25 level without too much difficulty," he said. but he said it won't climb further and he expects it to remain in a trading range between $1.10 and $1.25. he noted that the equity markets will set the tone for the industrial metals this week and traders should keep an eye on wall street. william o'neill, research director for elders futures inc. in new york, said for a rally to occur, there must be demand from the far east. he added that talk of strike settlements at producing mines has been fully discounted. however, to resume the bull trend, according to mr. o'neill, copper would have to close over $1.19. he said there are two reports this week that might affect prices: the purchasing managers report on wednesday and the unemployment report on friday. precious metals friday's strong price gains confirmed a turnaround in the precious metals markets, according to painewebber's mr. frawley. "most traders will be looking to buy {on} pullbacks," he said. he thought the moves in the metals last week were most influenced by the uncertainty in the equity and other financial markets. according to mr. frawley, floor traders say there is good support for december gold in the $374 to $375 per ounce area, around $5.20 an ounce for december silver and in the $485 to $490 an ounce range for january platinum. william o'neill, research director for elders futures inc. in new york, said the price action for all of last week is the best he has seen on a weekly basis in more than a year. he said last week's activity in gold could portend a move to $390 an ounce for the december contract. he also said traders should keep an eye on the stock market, because "if the stock market rallies, that could spell trouble for the precious metals." he said traders should be on the lookout for how metals producers react to this rally. "i expect to see some selling, but will they kill this one as they have every rally in the recent past" by selling and locking in prices for their production? he noted that for the first time in months there was some light investor interest in the metals. grains and soybeans prices this week will likely be dominated by reports on the progress of the corn and soybean harvest as well as by speculation about more purchases of u.s. crops by the soviet union. in recent weeks, warm and dry weather has sped the midwest harvest and that is permitting farmers to rebuild the stockpiles that were cut by the 1988 drought. if the weather allowed farmers to work in their fields over the weekend, many midwest grain elevators will probably sell futures contracts today at the chicago board of trade in order to hedge their weekend purchases from farmers. that selling of futures contracts by elevators is what helps keep downward pressure on crop prices during the harvest. traders will also watch for whether the soviet union continues its traditional fall buying of u.s. grain. so far this month, the soviets have bought about 7.2 million metric tons of u.s. corn. there may be some activity in soybean prices this week as investors try to get rid of the contract for november delivery. investors usually don't want to take physical delivery of a contract, preferring instead to profit from its price swings and then end any obligation to take delivery or make delivery as it nears expiration.
employees of the globe and mail, a thomson corp. newspaper in toronto, voted to accept a tentative contract agreement saturday, averting a strike at canada's leading daily. under the terms of the three-year contract, similar to one reached at torstar corp. 's toronto star newspaper earlier this month, the 500 globe and mail workers will see a raise of 8% in the contract's first year and 7% in each of the following two years. lorne slotnick, vice chairman of the southern ontario newspaper guild, the union representing the workers, said thomson made significant concessions in the final round of talks. in addition to wage increases, the union negotiated improved vacation plans, benefit packages and pension plans, mr. slotnick said. he said more than 70% of the bargaining unit voted in favor of the agreement.
wall street is just about ready to line the bird cage with paper stocks. for three years, a healthy economy and the export-boosting effects of a weak dollar propelled sales and earnings of the big paper companies to record levels. as the good times rolled they more than doubled their prices for pulp, a raw material used in all sorts of paper, to $830 a metric ton this past spring from $380 a ton at the start of 1986. but now the companies are getting into trouble because they undertook a record expansion program while they were raising prices sharply. third-quarter profits fell at several companies. "put your money in a good utility or bank stock, not a paper company," advises george adler of smith barney. other analysts are nearly as pessimistic. gary palmero of oppenheimer & co. expects a 30% decline in earnings between now and 1991 for "commodity-oriented" paper companies, which account for the majority of the industry. robert schneider of duff & phelps sees paper-company stock prices falling 10% to 15% in 1990, perhaps 25% if there's a recession. paper companies concede that business has been off recently. but they attribute much of the weakness to customer inventory reductions. generally they maintain that, barring a recession and a further strengthening of the dollar against foreign currencies, the industry isn't headed for a prolonged slump. "it won't be an earthshaking drop," a weyerhaeuser spokesman says. last week mr. adler lowered his rating from hold to "avoid" on boise cascade, champion international, great northern nekoosa, international paper, louisiana pacific and weyerhaeuser. oppenheimer's mr. palmero, meanwhile, is steering clear of gaylord container, stone container and federal paper board. mr. schneider is cool to georgia pacific and abitibi-price. lawrence ross of painewebber would avoid union camp. the companies in question believe the analysts are too pessimistic. great northern nekoosa said, "the odds of the dire predictions about us being right are small." international paper emphasizes that it is better positioned than most companies for the coming overcapacity because its individual mills can make more than one grade of paper. a boise-cascade spokesman referred to a speech by chairman john fery, in which he said that markets generally are stable, although some risk of further price deterioration exists. stone container chairman roger stone said that, unlike for some other paper products, demand for stone's principal commodity, unbleached containerboard, remains strong. he expects the price for that product to rise even more next year. gaylord container said analysts are skeptical of it because it's carrying a lot of debt. champion international said, "we've gotten our costs down and we're better positioned for any cyclical downturn than we've ever been." louisiana pacific and georgia pacific said a number of other analysts are recommending them because of their strong wood-products business. federal paper board said, "we're not as exposed as the popular perception of us." the company explained that its main product, bleached paperboard, which goes into some advertising materials and white boxes, historically doesn't have sharp price swings. because the stock prices of some paper companies already reflect an expected profit slump, painewebber's mr. ross says he thinks that next year the share prices of some companies may fall at most only 5% to 10%. a company such as federal paper board may be overly discounted and looks "tempting" to him, he says, though he isn't yet recommending the shares. wall street isn't avoiding everything connected with paper. mr. palmero recommends temple-inland, explaining that it is "virtually the sole major paper company not undergoing a major capacity expansion," and thus should be able to lower long-term debt substantially next year. a temple-inland spokesman said the company expects record earnings in 1989, and "we're still pretty bullish" on 1990. the analysts say their gloomy forecasts have a flip side. some take a warm view of consumer-oriented paper companies, which buy pulp from the commodity producers and should benefit from the expected declines in pulp prices. estimates on how much pulp prices will fall next year currently run between $150 and $250 a metric ton. analysts agree that the price drop should especially benefit the two big tissue makers, scott paper and kimberly-clark. a spokesman for scott says that assuming the price of pulp continues to soften, "we should do well."
abb asea brown boveri b.v. said it signed a contract for the largest-ever power plant order in the netherlands. abb said the contract, signed with the dutch utility n.v. energieproduktiebedrijf una, is valued in excess of $200 million. the accord is for a turbogenerator plant at the coal-fired power station hemweg in amsterdam. abb asea brown boveri is the dutch unit of the swedish-swiss electrical engineering group abb asea brown boveri ag. abb said a significant portion of the order will be placed with dutch subcontractors, adding that a group has been set up for this purpose. the dutch utility firm serves the amsterdam and utrecht areas. the planned turbogenerator plant is expected to go into operation in 1994.
nissan motor co. expects net income to reach 120 billion yen (u.s. $857 million) in its current fiscal year, up from 114.6 billion yen in the previous year, yutaka kume, president, said. mr. kume made the earnings projection for fiscal 1990, ending next march 31, in an interview with u.s. automotive writers attending the tokyo motor show. the executive said that the anticipated earnings increase is fairly modest because nissan is spending heavily to bolster its dealership network in japan and because of currency-exchange fluctuations. during the next decade, mr. kume said, nissan plans to boost overseas vehicle production sufficiently to account for a majority of sales outside japan. last year, mr. kume said, nissan exported slightly over one million vehicles, and produced 570,000 cars and trucks at its factories in north america, europe and australia. but by 1992, he added, nissan will build one million vehicles a year outside japan, or sufficient to equal exports. "by the end of the 1990s," he said, "we want to be producing roughly two vehicles overseas for every vehicle that we export from japan." that will involve a substantial increase in overseas manufacturing capacity, he acknowledged, but didn't provide specific details.
national intergroup inc. said it expects to report a charge of $5.3 million related to the sale of its aluminum unit's extrusion division for the third quarter. the company said it has agreed to sell the extrusion division for $15 million to r.d. werner co., a closely held firm based in greenville, pa. the charge is offset by an after-tax gain of about $30 million in the quarter from the previously announced pact to sell national aluminum's rolling division. national intergroup in the year-ago third quarter earned $22.5 million, or 97 cents a share, including a gain of $18 million from the sale of a steel tube company. revenue was $778.6 million. the company also said it continues to explore all options concerning the possible sale of national aluminum's 54.5% stake in an aluminum smelter in hawesville, ky. the sale of the extrusion division is subject to audit adjustments for working capital changes through the closing. the agreement also provides for potential payments of additional proceeds to national aluminum over the next two years, depending on the plant's shipping levels. the extrusion unit produces bare and painted custom extrusions for building products and construction industries. in fiscal 1989, it had sales of about $40 million and an operating loss of $1.5 million.
the municipal bond market is bracing for tough times through the end of the year as it struggles to absorb an oversupply of bonds and two of its best customers turn into sellers. commercial banks and property/casualty insurers, which together own about 36% of all municipal bonds, have been dumping their securities for weeks. last week, traders said, there were three institutional sellers for every buyer. "every day we're getting new bid lists" from would-be sellers, one trader said. "most dealers cannot continue to absorb this supply." as a result, yields on long-term muni bonds now stand at about 95% of long-term treasury yields, the highest such level in more than two years. "there is incredible negative psychology building in the market," said donna avedisian, a vice president at merrill lynch & co. "people are very concerned about who is going to step up to the plate and buy municipal bonds in the absence of institutional buyers." the yield on a group of 25 revenue bonds compiled by the bond buyer, a trade publication, now exceeds 7.50%. at this week's new york city bond sale, traders expect yields on the 20-year new york bonds to nearly match the 7.9% yield on 30-year treasury bonds. for an investor in the 28% federal tax bracket, 7.9% tax-free is the same as 10.38% on a taxable investment. that's a taxable-equivalent yield nearly three percentage points more than the current yield on 30-year treasury bonds. how quickly things change. this past summer, investors' appetite for municipal bonds seemed insatiable. individuals eager for tax-free income drove up bond prices, making state and local government debt one of the best-performing types of fixed-income investments during the period. but while analysts say that municipal bonds still offer good value, you wouldn't know it by the way institutional investors are rushing to dump their holdings. bond market analysts say the institutional selling was triggered by several factors. big banks such as chemical bank and chase manhattan, which have been taking heavy charges to expand their third world loan-loss reserves, aren't looking for tax-exempt income. "we don't need the shelter of tax-free bonds," said a spokeswoman at chemical. in recent weeks, traders said, chemical has sold more than $1 billion of tax-free bonds. the spokeswoman confirmed that the bank has significantly reduced its muni holdings, but couldn't immediately confirm the amount. insurance companies are rushing to sell before the end of the year, when some of their tax benefits associated with municipal bonds will be phased out. there is speculation that property/casualty firms will sell even more munis as they scramble to raise cash to pay claims related to hurricane hugo and the northern california earthquake. fundamental factors are at work as well. muni bond holders are worried about the impact of a slowing economy on tax revenue, at a time when many state and local governments already face budget deficits and huge spending needs. the recent natural disasters, and the need of many other cities to rebuild crumbling infrastructure, suggests that supply of new issues will continue to rise sharply -- even as demand tapers off. "there is just so much going on that it's difficult to pick just one factor that's driving the market," said ronald ian heller, vice president at first chicago capital markets inc., a subsidiary of first chicago corp. some of the recent selling could actually be considered a positive sign. mutual funds, for example, are said to be selling existing municipal bonds to raise cash to buy new issues. because municipal bonds yields have risen at a time when interest rates generally have fallen, some portfolio managers are assuming that bonds bought now will appreciate in value as the municipal bond market rebounds. ms. avedisian believes that the mutual funds are selling muni bonds that have a negative convexity -- those that have appreciated in price slowly relative to the decline in interest rates. such bonds, she says, are those that are nearing their call date. but traders said the market's tone could pick up this week if new york city's $787 million bond offering goes well. the offering will include $729 million of 20-year tax-exempt bonds and $57.8 million of taxable bonds. a few weeks ago, new york sold $750 million of tax-exempts. new york city bonds have been beaten down for three straight weeks. on friday, some issues fell nearly one point, or close to $10 for each $1,000 face amount. the sell-off in new york city bonds was triggered by concerns about the city's financial health and political uncertainty in view of the impending mayoral election. the city's economy is growing weaker and expenditures are rising as tax revenue is falling. "the city has issued so much supply recently that some people are getting a little concerned. they'd like to see some other names in their portfolios," said michael s. appelbaum, first vice president at shearson lehman hutton. but he thinks investors may be overreacting to the market's problems. overall, he says, municipal prices are "very cheap" and represent an "excellent buying opportunity." friday's market activity treasury bonds fell sharply on confusion about this week's treasury debt auction and rumors that a major japanese investor was unloading large amounts of long-term bonds. the treasury's benchmark 30-year bond ended at a price of 102 2/32, down nearly 5/8 point from thursday, or about $6.25 for each $1,000 face amount. the issue's yield rose to 7.93% from 7.88%. late thursday, the treasury said it needed to raise $17 billion quickly and would do so by issuing new securities this week. credit market analysts expected the treasury to cancel today's three-month and six-month sale and to sell $17 billion of cash management bills. instead, the treasury announced it would sell $2 billion of 51-day cash management bills today and said that the weekly sale of $15.6 billion of three-month and six-month bills will take place today, as usual, but the sale will settle tomorrow instead of thursday. by moving the settlement date ahead, the treasury can raise money under the $2.87 trillion debt ceiling that is in effect through tomorrow, after which it reverts to $2.8 trillion. the market also was hurt by rumors that nippon kangyo kakumaru, a japanese brokerage firm, was unloading some of the 30-year bonds it recently purchased. one dealer said the talk was that the firm sold about $500 million of bellwether 30-year bonds. the firm is thought to have purchased up to $3 billion of 30-year bonds in a buying spree on wednesday and the previous thursday. dealers say the firm apparently has wanted to publicize its recent buying and subsequent selling of 30-year bonds by using cantor fitzgerald securities corp. as a broker. cantor provides price quotes to telerate systems inc., a widely used electronic system. nippon kangyo's moves puzzled traders and created confusion among potential investors, many of whom decided to stay out of the market. as a result of its large-scale buying, some analysts now say that liquidity, or the ability to easily buy and sell, has been constrained in the benchmark treasury bond issue. in other markets: -- the junk bonds of rjr nabisco inc. rallied friday on news that the company is selling its candy bar brands to nestle foods corp. for $370 million. the sale price, which was above wall street expectations, sent many rjr securities up by one point. "it shows that there are buyers of high-quality assets at high prices in today's market," said robert long, managing director and head of the high-yield research department at first boston corp. many of the rjr securities, which had been trading near their 52-week lows earlier in the session, bounced back after the company's announcement that it agreed to sell its baby ruth, butterfinger and pearson candy businesses to nestle foods, a unit of the swiss-based food concern. the sale, expected to close before the end of the year, also includes a manufacturing plant in franklin park, ill. rjr's subordinated discount debentures of 2001, which traded as low as 45 friday, finished the day at 46 7/8. other rjr securities also closed higher. rjr holdings capital corp. 's 14.7% convertible pay-in-kind securities maturing in 2009 closed 1/2 higher at 86 1/2 after trading as low as 85 1/4. most other junk bond issues finished a quarter-point lower on rumors that campeau corp. was filing for protection from creditors under chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code. a spokesman for campeau called the rumors "ridiculous." most investment-grade bonds fell 3/8 to 1/2 point. -- mortgage securities fell 7/32 to 8/32 but held up better than intermediate treasurys. dealers said some defensive investors were buyers of mortgages, as were dealers seeking collateral for remics priced earlier last week. among major issues, government national mortgage association 9% securities for november delivery ended at 98 12/32, down 8/32 point for a yield of about 9.35% to a 12-year average life assumption.
the premium the elderly pay for coverage of doctor's bills under part b of the medicare health insurance plan will rise to $29 a month in 1990 from $27.90, the department of health and human services said. in addition, a second part b premium to cover the cost of the new program of insurance against catastrophic illness will rise to $4.90 a month from $4, if congress doesn't change the program. the house has voted to repeal most of the catastrophic coverage act of 1988, however, which would end the monthly catastrophic-care premium, as well as an unpopular income surtax paid by about 40% of the wealthier medicare beneficiaries. under a less-sweeping senate plan, the catastrophic-care monthly premium would continue, rising to $4.90 next year, but the surtax would be abolished. medicare part b pays 80% of a beneficiary's allowable doctor's bills after an annual deductible of $75. the catastrophic coverage act would add a stop-loss provision next year to limit the maximum beneficiaries must pay for doctors. both the house and senate bills to reduce the cost and coverage of the catastrophic-care plan would eliminate the cap on doctor's bills. if the house prevails in its efforts to kill the catastrophic-care plan, the monthly part b premium will be $29 next year. if the senate plan prevails, the premium will be $33.90, with the additional $4.90 going to pay for expanded hospital coverage under part a of medicare. most of part a's costs are paid by a payroll tax on workers and employers.
lockheed corp. said it will trim its aeronautical systems work force in california and georgia by several hundred workers, reflecting the defense industry's decline. the lockheed unit has 24,000 workers; it expects to make the cuts through a combination of furloughs, attrition and retirements. the reductions should be complete by the end of the year, a spokesman said, adding that the exact number to be cut hasn't been determined. lockheed reported a $32 million third-quarter net loss, largely because of cost overruns on fixed-price military contracts. noting that other defense contractors are complaining of losses on such contracts, analysts say taxpayers have been getting illusionary bargains on weapons systems in recent years. defense contractors "cannot continue to get contracts on that basis," said howard rubel, an analyst with c.j. lawrence, morgan grenfell inc. in new york. "the pain is too great."
jim pattison industries ltd., one of a group of closely held companies owned by entrepreneur james pattison, said it "intends to seek control" of 30%-owned innopac inc., a toronto packaging concern. jim pattison industries, a holding company with annual sales of about c$1.9 billion, largely from car dealerships and grocery stores, didn't elaborate on the statement, and a company official declined further comment. the company said it currently holds about 4.2 million of innopac's 13.8 million common shares outstanding, which have an aggregate market value of about 137.8 million canadian dollars (us$117.3 million). separately, innopac reported a fourth-quarter loss of about c$2.6 million, or 18 canadian cents a share, reflecting inventory write-downs. the results made net income for the year ended aug. 31 c$2.7 million, or 20 canadian cents a share, down from c$9.7 million, or 70 canadian cents a share last year. revenue was c$291.6 million, up from c$252 million in 1988. martin fabi, innopac's president and chief executive, said innopac viewed mr. pattison's decision to seek control as a "very positive" move. "i'm happy that he feels positively about our company," he said. mr. fabi wouldn't say directly whether mr. pattison has disclosed potential terms for his planned bid for control. among other things, innopac is involved in recycling polystyrene foam products that are often used by fast food chains, such as mcdonald's corp., for food packaging. a joint venture involving units of innopac and mobil corp. earlier this year opened the first u.s. polystyrene recycling plant, in leominster, mass.
program trading is being curbed by more securities firms, but big institutional investors are expected to continue the practice, further roiling the stock market. bowing to criticism, bear stearns, morgan stanley and oppenheimer joined painewebber in suspending stock-index arbitrage trading for their own accounts. still, stock-index funds are expected to continue launching big programs through the market. several big board firms are organizing to complain about program trading and the exchange's role in it. the effort is being led by contel. personal spending rose 0.2% in september, the smallest gain in a year. the slowdown raises questions about the economy's strength because spending fueled much of the third-quarter gnp growth. meanwhile, personal income edged up 0.3%. factory owners are buying new machinery at a healthy rate this fall, machine-tool makers say. but weak car sales raise questions about future demand from the auto sector. southern's gulf power unit may plead guilty this week to charges it illegally steered company money to politicians through third parties. the tentative pact would resolve part of a broad investigation of the atlanta-based company in the past year. lin broadcasting and bellsouth sweetened their plan to merge cellular phone operations, offering lin holders a special $42-a-share payout. but the new pact will force huge debt on the new firm and could still fail to thwart rival suitor mccaw cellular. unisys posted a $648.2 million loss for the third quarter as it moved quickly to take write-offs for various problems and prepare for a turnaround. but some analysts wonder how strong the recovery will be. rjr nabisco agreed to sell three candy businesses to nestle for $370 million. the accord helps rjr pay off debt and boosts nestle's 7% share of the u.s. candy market to 12%. gm and ford are expected to go head to head in the markets to buy up rival 15% stakes in jaguar. gm confirmed it received u.s. antitrust clearance to boost its holding. sansui electric agreed to sell a 51% stake to polly peck of britain for $110 million. still, analysts said the accord doesn't suggest japan is opening up to more foreign takeovers. kellogg suspended work on a $1 billion cereal plant, indicating a pessimistic outlook by the cereal maker, which has been losing market share. insurers could see claims totaling nearly $1 billion from the san francisco earthquake, far less than the $4 billion from hurricane hugo. nashua strengthened its poison-pill plan after announcing a dutch firm is seeking to buy up to 25% of the new hampshire copier company. mobil is cutting back its u.s. oil and gas exploration and production group by up to 15% as part of a restructuring of the business. markets --- stocks: volume 170,330,000 shares. dow jones industrials 2596.72, off 17.01; transportation 1190.43, off 14.76; utilities 215.86, up 0.19. bonds: shearson lehman hutton treasury index 3406.31, off commodities: dow jones futures index 129.49, up 0.27; spot index 130.80, off 0.24. dollar: 141.65 yen, off 0.45; 1.8300 marks, off 0.0100.
(during its centennial year, the wall street journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of american business history.) thomas jefferson sold congress on the idea of the decimal system for currency, thus saving americans the headaches of pounds, shillings and pence. but he struck out with the decimal system of metric weights and measures the french had invented. instead, congress opted for the inches, feet and yards the colonists had brought with them. americans didn't dislike metrics; they simply ignored them. scientists felt differently. in 1807, the swiss mathematician who headed the u.s. coast and geodetic survey made an "iron meter" that he had brought from europe the standard of measure. by the end of the century scientists had embraced the system. businessmen took their cue from the engineers. when congress finally passed the metric conversion act in 1975, industry was far ahead. because the law made compliance voluntary, it inspired little more than jokes. (the press had a field day with questions about what would happen to "six-footer," "yardstick" and "inchworm.") today, though the public is barely aware, much of u.s. industry, particularly companies manufacturing or selling overseas, have made metrics routine. general motors, for example, uses metric terms for its automobile bodies and power trains. (in auto advertising, however, items such as wheelbases are still described in inches.) farm-machine makers such as caterpillar and deere work in the metric system. the liquor industry went metric 10 years ago. the pentagon has led the charge, particularly as military alliances spread world-wide. new weapons systems will be around until the next century, notes john tascher, the defense department's metric coordinator. still, like the auto makers, when dealing with mr. everyman the pentagon sticks to the tried and true. soldiers and sailors are still measured in inches and pounds.
whittle communications l.p., which for months has fought a public relations battle with education leaders, said it has signed 500 schools in 24 states to subscribe to the controversial channel one news program and its sister programs. channel one, a satellite-delivered daily program supported by advertising, is scheduled to be launched next march. whittle said its field staff signed up the 500 schools in 238 school districts after only eight weeks and company executives now expect to reach their start-up goal of 1,000 schools before the end of this year. christopher whittle, chairman of the knoxville, tenn., media company that is 50% owned by time warner inc., said that by december 1990 he expects to have channel one installed in about 8,000 schools with a potential audience of six million. installation of the tv system, which includes providing free 19-inch tv sets in classrooms, begins in january. "what we've done in eight weeks shows we won't have enormous difficulties getting to the place we want to be," said mr. whittle. he said his sales force is signing up schools at the rate of 25 a day. in california and new york, state officials have opposed channel one. mr. whittle said private and parochial schools in both states will be canvassed to see if they are interested in getting the programs. subscribing schools get the 12-minute daily channel one news program, whose four 30-second tv ads during each show have drawn protests from educators. subscribers also get the classroom channel, which will feature ad-free educational programming similar to some public-tv shows, and the educator's channel, which will offer instructional programming for teachers and school administrators and will be supported by advertising. whittle has met some resistance. the educational network, as mr. whittle has named the three programs, has been offered to 1,290 school districts and whittle continues to negotiate with 919 districts. about 10% of the school districts approached have rejected the network. mr. whittle said that so far, three of the six schools that carried the program in a five-week test last spring have subscribed to the program. one of the test schools, withrow high school in cincinnati, rejected the project. john bruner, associate director of communications for cincinnati public schools, said channel one was rejected because students watching the program didn't fare particularly better on a 28-question current events quiz than a control school without the program and school absences were almost unchanged during the period when the program was being aired. "the number of correct responses was 45% on the test and school absences didn't change much," said mr. bruner. "the pilot program was received well (by teachers and students), but there wasn't reason enough to sign up. we even invited the public to stop by and see the program, but there wasn't much interest." advertisers are showing interest. last month, whittle announced it had sold $150 million in advertising time on the network to national advertisers. mr. whittle friday said several more advertisers have been added. whittle is spending $150 million initially to launch the network. installation of satellite dishes, tvs and videocassette equipment will cost the company about $20,000 per school, mr. whittle said.
the following u.s. treasury, corporate and municipal offerings are tentatively scheduled for sale this week, according to dow jones capital markets report: $15.6 billion of three-month and six-month bills. $2 billion of 51-day cash management bills. associated natural gas corp. -- 1.4 million common shares, via dillon read & co. b & h crude carriers ltd. -- four million common shares, via salomon brothers inc. chemical banking corp. -- 14 million common shares, via goldman, sachs & co. chemex pharmaceuticals inc. -- 1.2 million units consisting of two shares of common stock and one common warrant, via painewebber inc. comcast corp. -- $150 million convertible debentures, via merrill lynch capital markets. energy service co. -- 9.5 million common shares, via alex. brown & sons inc. harmonia bancorp inc. -- 4,750,000 common shares, via shearson lehman hutton inc. healthsource inc. -- two million common shares, via kidder, peabody & co. immune response corp. -- three million common shares, via merrill lynch. marsam pharmaceuticals inc. -- 1.3 million common shares, via smith barney harris upham & co. potash corp. of saskatchewan inc. -- 13 million common shares, via merrill lynch. municipal new jersey wastewater treatment trust -- $75,075,000 of various bonds, including $40.86 million wastewater treatment insured bonds, series 1989a, and $34,215,000 wastewater treatment bonds, series 1989b, via competitive bid. eastern municipal water district, calif. -- $56,565,000 of 1989 certificates of participation (treatment plant projects), via competitive bid. california health facilities financing authority -- $114 million of health facility revenue bonds (catholic healthcare west), series 1989a, via a first boston corp. group. detroit -- $130 million of distributable state aid bonds, via a chemical securities inc. group. maryland community development administration, department of housing and community development -- $80 million of single-family program bonds, 1989 4th and 5th series, via a merrill lynch group. matagorda county navigation district no. 1, texas -- $70,315,000 of pollution control revenue alternative minimum tax (amt) bonds (south texas project units no. 1 and 2), via a goldman sachs group. new york city -- $786,860,000 of bonds, fiscal 1990 series c and d, including $729.04 million tax-exempt bonds and $57.82 million taxable bonds, via a goldman sachs group. santa ana redevelopment agency -- $107 million of tax allocation bonds, 1989 series a-d, via a donaldson lufkin & jenrette securities corp. group. pending shelby county, tenn. -- $80 million of refunding bonds, series 1989, via a first tennessee bank group.
hewlett-packard co. said it raised its stake in octel communications corp. to 8.5% of the common shares outstanding. in a securities and exchange commission filing, hewlett-packard said it now holds 1,384,119 octel common shares, including 100,000 shares bought from aug. 26 to oct. 20 for $23.31 to $24.25 a share. hewlett-packard, a palo alto, calif., computer company, said it acquired the stock "to develop and maintain a strategic partnership in which each company remains independent while working together to market and sell their products." octel said the purchase was expected. hewlett-packard affirmed it doesn't plan to obtain control of octel, a milpitas, calif., maker of voice-processing systems. according to the filing, hewlett-packard acquired 730,070 common shares from octel as a result of an aug. 10, 1988, stock purchase agreement. that accord also called for hewlett-packard to buy 730,070 octel shares in the open market within 18 months. in addition, hewlett-packard acquired a two-year option to buy an extra 10%, of which half may be sold directly to hewlett-packard by octel.
following is a weekly listing of unadited net asset values of publicly traded investment fund shares, reported by the companies as of friday's close. also shown is the closing listed market price or a dealer-to-dealer asked price of each fund's shares, with the percentage of difference. closed end bond funds flexible portfolio funds specialized equity and convertible funds a-ex-dividend. b-as of thursday's close. c-translated at commercial rand exchange rate. e-in canadian dollars. f-as of wednesday's close. z-not available.
wham! bam! twice in two weeks the unraveling of the on-again, off-again ual buy-out slammed the stock market. now, stock prices seem to be in a general retreat. since peaking at 2791.41 on oct. 9, the dow jones industrial average has lost 194.69 points, or 7%, closing friday at 2596.72, down 17.01. the number of issues falling on the new york stock exchange each day is eclipsing the number of gainers. and the number of stocks hitting new lows far outstrips the number setting new highs. but why should an iffy $6.79 billion leveraged buy-out deal shake the foundations of the entire stock market? opinions vary about how important the ual deal was to the market's health, but analysts generally agree that the market gyrations created as the ual plan crumbled revealed a fundamental change in investor psychology. "if this had happened a few months ago when the atmosphere was still very positive it wouldn't have been greeted with anything like the impact it has had over the past two weeks," says dennis jarrett, a market strategist at kidder peabody. there are, of course, analysts who view the near-panic that briefly swept through investors on oct. 13 and again on oct. 24 as momentary lapses of good judgment that have only temporarily undermined a healthy stock market. sure, price action is volatile and that's scary, but all-in-all stocks are still a good place to be, they suggest. the reaction to the ual debacle "is mindless," says john connolly, chief market strategist at dean witter. "ual is a small deal as far as the overall market is concerned. the only way you can make it a big deal is to draw linkages that just don't make sense." he suggests, for example, that investors may have assumed that just because ual couldn't get financing, no leveraged buy-outs can get financing. carried even further, some investors assumed that since leveraged buy-outs are the only thing propping up stock prices, the market would collapse if no more lbos could be done. "there will still be deals," argues mr. connolly. "there may not be as many and the buyers may not get away with some of the things they've done in the past, but deals won't disappear." he forecasts that the emphasis in mergers and acquisitions may soon return to what he calls "strategic deals, in which somebody is taking over a company not to milk the cash flow, but because it's a good fit." and even without deals, mr. connolly figures the market would remain healthy. he notes, for instance, that there hasn't been a merger or acquisition among the 30 stocks in the dow jones industrial average since 1986, yet that average only three weeks ago hit a record high. "those stocks are up because their earnings are up and their dividends are up," he says. even the volatility created by stock index arbitrage and other computer-driven trading strategies isn't entirely bad, in mr. connolly's view. for the long-term investor who picks stocks carefully, the price volatility can provide welcome buying opportunities as short-term players scramble frantically to sell stocks in a matter of minutes. "who can make the better decision, the guy who has 10 seconds to decide what to do or the guy with all the time in the world?" he says. "what on earth does the ual deal have to do with the price of walmart, which i was able to buy on oct. 16 at a very attractive price?" kidder peabody's mr. jarrett also sees some benefits to the stock market's recent drop. "we've run into a market that was beginning to run out of steam and get frothy," he says. "the balloon had been blown up so big that when somebody came along with a pin -- in this case the ual deal -- we got a little pop." the pop sobered up investors who had been getting a little too ebullient, says mr. jarrett. "it provided an excuse for people to get back to reality and to look at the economic data, especially the third-quarter economic numbers, and to realize that we can't continue to gloss over what is going on in the junk bond market." but he figures that at current levels the stock market is comfortably valued, even with the economy obviously slowing. "just because we've got some realism back in the market doesn't mean it's going lower from here," he says. "the bottom line is that it's healthy to have this kind of sideways activity, especially after a 30% gain in stock values over the past 12 months." he's now estimating that after a period of consolidation, the dow jones industrial average will once again forge new highs. maybe, maybe not. abby joseph cohen, a market strategist at drexel burnham lambert, isn't nearly so sanguine about the market's chances of surging to new highs anytime soon. her view is that stock prices have three major props: merger and buy-out proposals, earnings and the economic outlook. at current levels of economic activity and earnings, stocks are fairly valued, she says. but any chance for prices to surge above fair value lies in the speculation that accompanies a vigorous merger and buy-out business, and ual has obviously put a damper on that. "stocks aren't cheap anymore, there have been some judicial and legislative changes in the merger area and all of this changes the arithmetic of deals," she says. "i'm not saying they've stopped altogether, but future deals are going to be structured differently and bids probably won't be as high." but that's not the only problem for stocks. the other two props -- earnings and the economic outlook -- are troubling, too. "m&a is getting all the headlines right now, but these other things have been building up more gradually," she says. third-quarter earnings have been generally disappointing and with economic data showing a clear slowing, the outlook for earnings in the fourth quarter and all of 1990 is getting worse. "there are a lot more downward than upward revisions and it looks like people are questioning corporate profits as a means of support for stock prices," she says. with all this, can stock prices hold their own? "the question is unanswerable at this point," she says. "it depends on what happens. if the economy slips into a recession, then this isn't a level that's going to hold." friday's market activity stock prices tumbled for a third consecutive day as earnings disappointments, a sluggish economy and a fragile junk bond market continued to weigh on investors. the dow jones industrial average fell 17.01 points to 2596.72 in active trading. volume on the new york stock exchange totaled 170,330,000 shares. declining issues on the big board were far ahead of gainers, 1,108 to 416. for the week the dow jones industrial average sank 92.42 points, or 3.4%. oil stocks escaped the brunt of friday's selling and several were able to post gains, including chevron, which rose 5/8 to 66 3/8 in big board composite trading of 2.4 million shares. the stock's advance reflected ongoing speculation that pennzoil is accumulating a stake in the company, according to dow jones professional investor report. both companies declined to comment on the rumors, but several industry analysts told the professional investor report they believed it was plausible that pennzoil may be buying chevron shares as a prelude to pushing for a restructuring of the company. usx gained 1/2 to 33 3/8 on a report in business week magazine that investor carl icahn is said to have raised his stake in the oil and steel company to just about 15%. earlier this month, mr. icahn boosted his usx stake to 13.4%. elsewhere in the oil sector, exxon rallied 7/8 to 45 3/4; amoco rose 1/8 to 47; texaco was unchanged at 51 3/4, and atlantic richfield fell 1 5/8 to 99 1/2. mobil, which said it plans to cut its exploration and production work force by about 8% in a restructuring, dropped 5/8 to 56 1/8. the precious metals sector outgained other dow jones industry groups by a wide margin for the second consecutive session. hecla mining rose 5/8 to 14; battle mountain gold climbed 3/4 to 16 3/4; homestake mining rose 1 1/8 to 16 7/8; lac minerals added 5/8 to 11; placer dome went up 7/8 to 16 3/4, and asa ltd. jumped 3 5/8 to 49 5/8. gold mining stocks traded on the american stock exchange also showed strength. echo bay mines rose 5/8 to 15 7/8; pegasus gold advanced 1 1/2 to 12, and corona class a gained 1/2 to 7 1/2. unisys dropped 3/4 to 16 1/4 after posting a third-quarter loss of $4.25 a share, including restructuring charges, but other important technology issues were mixed. compaq computer, which had lost 8 5/8 thursday following a disappointing quarterly report, gained 5/8 to 100 5/8. international business machines dropped 7/8 to 99 7/8. digital equipment tacked on 1 1/8 to 89 1/8, and hewlett-packard fell 3/8 to 49 3/8. dividend-related trading swelled volume in merrill lynch, which closed unchanged at 28 3/8 as 2.7 million shares changed hands. the stock has a 3.5% dividend yield and goes ex-dividend today. erbamont advanced 1 1/8 to 36 1/2 on 1.9 million shares. montedison, which owns about 72% of the company's common stock, agreed to buy the rest for $37 a share. himont, another majority-owned unit of montedison, added 1 1/4 to 47 1/8. milton roy jumped 2 to 18 3/8. crane said it holds an 8.9% stake in the company and may seek control. crane dropped 1 1/8 to 21 1/8. comprehensive care, which terminated its agreement to merge with first hospital, dropped 7/8 to 3 7/8. the company's decision was made after first hospital failed to obtain financing for its offer.
federal investigators have identified the problem in last july's crash of a united airlines flight in iowa: a structural flaw that developed during the making of a titanium engine disk. for several months, officials at the federal aviation administration and the national transportation safety board have suspected that a metallurgical flaw in the disk led to a crack that ultimately caused the tail engine to break apart in flight. the explosion sent shards of metal flying, severing the dc-10's hydraulic or control systems, and led to the crash that killed 112 people. but investigators could confirm their theory only after the recent retrieval of a big chunk of flight 232's tail engine from a cornfield near the sioux city airport in iowa. the safety board will begin four days of hearings on the accident tomorrow in sioux city. among the issues the board will examine is whether united airlines, a unit of ual corp., should have been able to detect the cracks through maintenance checks. the engine involved was a cf6-6 made by general electric co. anthony broderick, the faa's acting executive director for regulatory standards and compliance, said that recent tests of the failed engine disk indicate that a flaw -- known as "hard alpha" -- occurred in the titanium during its production almost 20 years ago. he said there wasn't any way to detect the flaw at that time, and that the process has since been changed to decrease the chance that such flaws would occur. the faa already has ordered that all 232 disks made by the old process be removed from the planes and subjected to an ultrasonic test in a water-submersion chamber. such tests make the faa confident that a sioux city-type accident "won't happen again," said mr. broderick. a spokesman for ge said that the company has been working with the faa all along on this issue and "will comply fully with the required inspections." but he also pointed out that the recalls will have no impact on ge's engine production. the cf6-6 series engines aren't being manufactured any more; they are only being used in the dc-10 series 10 planes currently in service, he said.
a frozen mountaintop in tibet may offer an important clue about whether the earth is warming perilously. researchers at ohio state university and lanzhou institute of glaciology and geocryology in china have analyzed samples of glacial ice in tibet and say temperatures there have been significantly higher on average over the past half-century than in any similar period in the past 10,000 years. the ice samples are an important piece of evidence supporting theories that the earth has warmed considerably in recent times, largely because of pollutants in the air, and will warm far more in the century ahead. a substantial warming would melt some of the earth's polar ice caps, raising the level of the oceans and causing widespread flooding of heavily populated coastal areas. "if you can use data to reconstruct what happened in the past, you have much more confidence in predictions for the future," said lonnie thompson, a research scientist at ohio state who dug for and analyzed the ice samples. to compare temperatures over the past 10,000 years, researchers analyzed the changes in concentrations of two forms of oxygen. these measurements can indicate temperature changes, researchers said, because the rates of evaporation of these oxygen atoms differ as temperatures change. analysis of ice from the dunde ice cap, a glacial plateau in tibet 17,000 feet above sea level, show that average temperatures were higher in 1937-87 than in any other 50-year period since before the last ice age, mr. thompson said. some climate models project that interior regions of asia would be among the first to heat up in a global warming because they are far from oceans, which moderate temperature changes. but the ice-core samples aren't definitive proof that the so-called greenhouse effect will lead to further substantial global heating, mr. thompson acknowledged. according to greenhouse theories, increased carbon dioxide emissions, largely caused by burning of fossil fuels, will cause the earth to warm up because carbon dioxide prevents heat from escaping into space. skeptics say that if that's the case, temperatures should have risen fairly uniformly over the past century, reflecting the increase in carbon dioxide. instead, the dunde ice-core record shows increasing temperatures from 1900 through the early 1950s, decreasing temperatures from the late 1950s through the mid-1970s, then higher temperatures again through last year. other temperature data show similar unexplained swings. "climate varies drastically due to natural causes," said mr. thompson. but he said ice samples from peru, greenland and antarctica all show substantial signs of warming.
cnw corp. said the final step in the acquisition of the company has been completed with the merger of cnw with a subsidiary of chicago & north western holdings corp. as reported, cnw agreed to be acquired by a group of investors led by blackstone capital partners limited partnership for $50 a share, or about $950 million.
congress sent to president bush an $8.5 billion military construction bill that cuts spending for new installations by 16% while revamping the pentagon budget to move more than $450 million from foreign bases to home-state projects. the fiscal 1990 measure builds on a pattern set earlier this year by house and senate defense authorizing committees, and -- at a time of retrenchment for the military and concern about the u.s.'s standing in the world economy -- overseas spending is most vulnerable. total pentagon requests for installations in west germany, japan, south korea, the united kingdom and the philippines, for example, are cut by almost two-thirds, while lawmakers added to the military budget for construction in all but a dozen states at home. the result is that instead of the pentagon's proposed split of 60-40 between domestic and foreign bases, the reduced funding is distributed by a ratio of approximately 70-30. the extra margin for bases in the u.s. enhances the power of the appropriations committees; meanwhile, lawmakers used their positions to garner as much as six times what the pentagon had requested for their individual states. house appropriations committee chairman jamie whitten (d., miss.) helped secure $49.7 million for his state, or more than double the pentagon's budget. west virginia, home of senate appropriations committee chairman robert byrd, would receive $21.5 million -- four times the military's request. tennessee and north carolina, home states of the two democratic chairmen of the house and senate military construction subcommittees, receive $243.2 million, or 25% above the pentagon's request. though spending for iowa and oregon was far less, their increases above pentagon requests -- 640% and 430%, respectively -- were much greater because of the influence of republicans at critical junctures. the swift passage of the bill, which cleared the senate and house on simple voice votes last week, contrasts with the problems still facing a more cumbersome $66.8 billion measure funding housing, environmental, space and veterans programs. by an 84-6 margin, the senate approved the bulk of the spending friday, but the bill was then sent back to the house to resolve the question of how to address budget limits on credit allocations for the federal housing administration. the house democratic leadership could seek to waive these restrictions, but the underlying bill is already under attack for excesses elsewhere. appropriations committees have used an assortment of devices to disguise as much as $1 billion in spending, and as critics have awakened to these devices, the bill can seem like a wounded caribou trying to make it past ice and wolves to reach safer winter grazing. much of the excess spending will be pushed into fiscal 1991, and in some cases is temporarily parked in slow-spending accounts in anticipation of being transferred to faster-spending areas after the budget scorekeeping is completed. for example, a house-senate conference ostensibly increased the national aeronautics and space administration budget for construction of facilities to nearly $592 million, or more than $200 million above what either chamber had previously approved. part of the increase would provide $90 million toward ensuring construction of a costly solid rocket-motor facility in mr. whitten's mississippi. but as much as $177 million, or nearly 30% of the account, is marked for potential transfers to research, management and flight accounts that are spent out at a faster clip. the bill's managers face criticism, too, for the unusual number of conditions openly imposed on where funds will be spent. conservatives, embarrassed by republican influence-peddling scandals at the department of housing and urban development, have used the issue in an effort to shift blame onto a democratic-controlled congress. hud secretary jack kemp backed an unsuccessful effort to strike such language last week, but received little support from the white house budget office, which wants to protect space-station funding in the bill and has tended to turn its eyes from pork-barrel amendments. within discretionary funds for community development grants, more than $3.7 million is allocated to six projects in michigan, home state of a subcommittee chairman, rep. bob traxler. house speaker thomas foley won $510,000 for a project in his district in washington state, and $1.3 million, earmarked by sen. daniel inouye, amounts to a business subsidy under the title "hawaiian sugar mills job retention." the powerful democrat had first wanted to add language relaxing environmental restrictions on two mills on the hamakua coast that are threatening to close. when this plan met resistance, it was agreed instead to take money from hud to subsidize needed improvements in two settling ponds for the mills, which employ an estimated 1,500 workers, according to mr. inouye's office.
dennis farney's oct. 13 page-one article "river of despair," about the poverty along the mississippi, fanned childhood memories of when my parents were sharecroppers in southeastern arkansas, only a few miles from the river. although we were white, the same economic factors affected us as affects the black people mr. farney writes about. fortunately, an aunt with a college degree bought a small farm and moved us 50 miles north to good schools and an environment that opened the world of opportunity for me as an eight-year-old. though i've been blessed with academic degrees and some success in the materialistic world, i've never forgotten or lost contact with those memories of the 1930s. most of the land in that and other parts of the delta are now owned by second, third or fourth generations of the same families. these are the families who used -- and sometime abused -- their sharecroppers, people who had no encouragement and little access to an education or training for a better life. following world war ii, when one family with mechanized equipment could farm crops formerly requiring 20 families, the surplus people were dumped into the mainstream of society with no social security, no skills in the workplace, no hope for their future except welfare. and today, many of their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren remain on welfare. in the meantime, the landowners continue receiving generous subsidies that began during new deal days. or those who choose not to farm can lease their lands and crop allotments for handsome sums. farmers in the midwest and other areas have suffered, but those along the mississippi continue to prosper with holdings that were built with the sweat of men and women living in economic slavery. and when they were no longer needed, they were turned loose unprepared to build lives of their own. denton harris chairman metro bank atlanta because the cycle of poverty along the lower mississippi goes back so many generations, breaking this cycle will be next to impossible. sadly, the cycle appears not as waves but as a downward spiral. yet the evidence that we have not hit bottom is found in the fact that we are not yet helping ourselves. the people of the delta are waiting for that big factory to open, river traffic to increase, government spending to fund job-training programs or public schools to educate apathetic students. because we refuse to face the tough answers, the questions continue as fodder for the commissions and committees, for the media and politicians. coffee-shop chatter does not lend itself to solving the problems of racism, teen pregnancy or lack of parental support or guidance. does the delta deserve government help in attracting industry when the majority of residents, black and white, do not realize racism alienates potential employers? should we focus on the region's infant-mortality rate when the vocal right-wingers and the school boards, mayors and legislators prohibit schools from teaching the two ways (abstinence or contraceptives) of decreasing teen pregnancy? delta problems are difficult, not impossible, to solve -- i am just not convinced that we are ready to solve them yet. leslie falls humphries little rock, ark. i would like to issue a challenge to corporate america. the next time expansion plans are mentioned at the old company and somebody says, "aw heck, guys, nobody can do it like japan or south korea," i wish you would butt in and say, "hold it, fellas, why don't we compare prices and use our own little third world country. we would even save on freight." there is no mystery why the delta originated "singin' the blues." eugene s. clarke iv hollandale, miss. your story is an insult to the citizens of the mississippi delta. many of the problems you presented exist in every part of this country. poverty is only two blocks from president bush's residence. for years, we tried to ignore the problem of poverty, and now that it has gotten out of hand it's a new crusade for the media and our democratic congress. nobody should have to live in such poor conditions as in "sugar ditch," but when you travel to washington, boston, chicago or new york, the same problems exist. the only difference is, in those cities the poor are housed in high-rise-project apartments each consisting of one room, with rusty pipes called plumbing, rodents and cockroaches everywhere and nonworking elevators -- and with the building patrolled by gangs and drug dealers. many middle-class people would love free food, medicaid insurance, utilities and rent. then maybe i could stay home and have seven children and watch oprah winfrey, like beulah in the article, instead of having one child and working constantly just to stay above water, like so many families in this country. dee ann wilson greenville, miss.
mobil corp. is in the midst of cutting back its exploration and production group, which finds and develops oil and gas reserves in the u.s., by as much as 15% as part of a new restructuring of that sector of its business. management advised employees friday that it was going to reduce employment in production operations of the group by 8%, or 400 people. the exploration side of the unit has recently undergone a similar overhaul, during which it also lost as many as 400 employees, a company spokesman said in response to questions. mobil exploration & producing u.s. inc., the group involved, currently has a work force of somewhat less than 5,000. a few years ago, mobil restructured the entire company during an industrywide shakeout. but since then u.s. oil production has declined and mobil wants to focus its oil-finding efforts overseas. mobil alluded to the work-force cuts last week when it took a $40 million charge as part of its third-quarter earnings and attributed it to a restructuring. mobil officials said that it is unlikely any additional charges related to this move will be taken in future quarters. on wednesday, mobil will begin offering separation packages and voluntary retirement in its u.s. production operation. mobil officials said they have been studying ways of streamlining these operations since early this year. during the coming months, layers of management will be peeled away and regional offices will become more autonomous. for greater efficiency, employees at those locations will be reorganized into teams responsible for managing the properties under their jurisdiction, mobil said. "the main feature of the new organization is that each local manager will have both the authority and accountability for profitable and technically sound operations," said charles e. spruell, president of the mobil unit. field offices at new orleans; houston; denver; midland, tex.; bakersfield, calif.; oklahoma city; and liberal, kan., will be maintained. but the staffs at some of those locations will be slashed while at others the work force will be increased. for instance, employment in denver will be reduced to 105 from 430. but on the west coast, where profitable oil production is more likely than in the midcontinent region, the bakersfield, calif., office staff of 130 will grow by 175 to 305. the reorganization will "focus on the value and potential of assets," mr. spruell said.
federal drug regulators, concerned over british reports that diabetics have died after shifting from animal to human-based insulin, say they are considering a study to see if similar deaths have occurred here. the united kingdom reports came from dr. patrick toseland, head of clinical chemistry at guy's hospital in london. in a telephone interview friday, dr. toseland said the number of sudden, unexplained deaths of diabetics he had seen this year was 17 compared with just two in 1985. at least six of the deaths occurred among relatively young diabetics who had switched from animal to human insulin within the past year, he said. dr. solomon sobel, director of metabolism and endrocrine drug products for the u.s. food and drug administration, said fda officials have discussed dr. toseland's findings "fairly intensively." while there have been no reports of similar sudden unexplained deaths among diabetics in the u.s., dr. sobel said the fda plans to examine dr. toseland's evidence and is considering its own study here. dr. toseland, a toxicologist, said he was preparing an article for a british forensic medical journal raising the possibility that the deaths may have occurred after human insulin blunted critical warning signs indicating hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar, which can kill diabetics. the usual warning signs of hypoglycemia include sweating, anxiety and cramps. with proper warning, diabetics can easily raise their blood sugar to safe levels by eating sugar or sugary food. "the anecdotal data certainly shows that some of the people were not aware of the rapid onset of hypoglycemia," dr. toseland said. at the u.s. national institutes of health, dr. robert e. silverman, chief of the diabetes program branch, said no evidence of unexpected deaths from hypoglycemia had shown up in a study of 1,500 diabetics that has been under way at nih for five years. however, he said officials conducting the study hadn't been looking for signs of problems related to hypoglycemia unawareness. "we are now monitoring for it much more closely," he said. "we do know there are slight differences in the way human and animal insulins drive down blood sugar," dr. sobel said. the human-based drug starts the blood sugar dropping sooner and drives it down faster, he said. "but we don't believe there is enough of a difference to be clinically significant," dr. sobel said. reports of dr. toseland's findings in the british press have triggered widespread concern among diabetics there. both the british diabetic association and the committee on safety in medicines -- britain's equivalent of the u.s. fda -- recently issued statements noting the lack of hard scientific evidence to support dr. toseland's findings. on friday, the american diabetes association issued a similar statement urging the six million u.s. diabetics not to overreact to the british report. "a loss of the warning symptoms of hypoglycemia is a complex problem that is very unlikely to be due simply to the type of insulin used," the american association said. the fda already requires drug manufacturers to include warnings with insulin products that symptoms of hypoglycemia are less pronounced with human insulin than with animal-based products. eli lilly & co., the indianapolis-based drug manufacturer, dominates the u.s. human insulin market with its product known as humulin. lilly is building plants to make the insulin in indianapolis and fagershein, france. in its latest annual report, lilly said humulin sales have shown "excellent growth." lilly officials said they had seen reports of hypoglycemic unawareness among some patients making the shift from animal to human insulin, but didn't know if the problem had caused any deaths. dr. leigh thompson, a lilly group vice president, said the company's clinical trials of both its animal and human-based insulins indicated no difference in the level of hypoglycemia between users of either product. dr. toseland said most of the british diabetics who died had been taking a human-based insulin made by novo/nordisk, a danish manufacturer. none of the diabetics were using lilly's insulin.
sharesbase corp. said it will reduce its 221-person work force by about 25%, effective tomorrow, in an effort to stem continuing losses. the company, which makes data base systems and software, said it expects to report a loss for the third quarter ended sept. 30.
defense intellectuals have complained for years that the pentagon cannot determine priorities because it has no strategy. last april, the new defense secretary, richard cheney, acknowledged that, "given an ideal world, we'd have a nice, neat, orderly process. we'd do the strategy and then we'd come around and do the budget. this city doesn't work that way." with a five-year defense plan costing more than $1.6 trillion, it's about time we put together a defense strategy that works in washington. this won't happen until strategists come down from their ivory tower and learn to work in the real world of limited budgets and uncertain futures. as it is, we identify national goals and the threats to these goals, we shape a strategy to counter these threats, we determine the forces needed to execute the strategy, before finally forging the budgets needed to build and maintain the forces. these procedures consume millions of man-hours of labor and produce tons of paper, and each year, their end product -- the five year defense plan -- promptly melts away. the graph on the left shows how this happens (see accompanying illustration -- wsj oct. 30, 1989). compare the past eight five-year plans with actual appropriations. the pentagon's strategists produce budgets that simply cannot be executed because they assume a defense strategy depends only on goals and threats. strategy, however, is about possibilities, not hopes and dreams. by ignoring costs, u.s. strategists abdicate their responsibility for hard decisions. that puts the real strategic decisions in the hands of others: bean counters, budgeteers, and pork-barrelers. these people have different agendas. and as a result -- as the recent vote by the house to undo mr. cheney's program terminations suggests -- the preservation of jobs is becoming the real goal of defense "strategy." how can we turn this situation around? reform starts in the pentagon. strategists should consider the impact of budget uncertainties at the beginning of the planning process. they ought to examine how a range of optimistic to pessimistic budget scenarios would change the defense program. they would then develop priorities by identifying the least painful program cuts as they moved from higher to lower budgets. they would also identify the best way to add programs, should the budget come in at higher levels. this kind of contingency analysis is common in war planning and business planning. there is no reason that it can not be done for defense planning. two steps are necessary to translate this idea into action. step 1 cleans up our books. our five-year plan contains three accounting devices -- negative money, an above guidance management reserve and optimistic inflation estimates -- which understate the spending the pentagon has committed itself to by almost $100 billion. negative money was invented in 1988 to make the 1990-94 five year defense plan conform to the numbers in president reagan's final budget submission to congress. that plan exceeded the numbers contained in his budget message by $45 billion. to make the books balance, as is required by law, somebody invented a new budget line item that simply subtracted $45 billion. it is known in the pentagon as the "negative wedge." the pentagon argues that the negative wedge is the net effect of $22 billion in the as-yet unidentified procurement reductions that it intends to find in future years and $23 billion in an "above guidance" management reserve that accounts for undefined programs that will materialize in the future. the 1990 plan also assumes inflation will decline to 1.7% by 1994. most forecasters, including those in the congressional budget office, assume inflation will be in excess of 4% in each of those five years. at that rate, the defense plan is underfunded by $48 billion. by adding the negative wedge and recalculating the remaining program using a more probable inflation estimate, we arrive at a baseline program costing $1.7 trillion between 1990 and 1994. step 2 examines how four progressively lower budget scenarios would change the baseline and how these changes would affect our national security. the graph on the right (which assumes a 4% rate of inflation), places these scenarios in the context of recent appropriations (see accompanying illustration -- wsj oct. 30, 1989). note how the baseline program assumes a sharp increase in future appropriations. step 2 will answer the question: what happens if these increases do not materialize? scenario 1, known as the "constant dollar freeze," reimburses the pentagon for inflation only -- it slopes upward at 4% per year. this scenario has been the rough position of the u.s. senate since 1985, and it reduces the baseline by $106 billion between 1990 and 1994. scenario 3, the "current dollar freeze," has been the approximate position of the house of representatives for about four years. it freezes the budget at its current level, and forces the pentagon to eat the effects of inflation until 1994. this reduces the baseline by $229 billion. scenario 2 extends the recent compromises between the house and the senate; it splits the difference between scenarios 1 and 3, by increasing the budget at 2% per year. it reduces the baseline by $169 billion. finally, scenario 4 reduces the budget by 2% per year for the next five years -- a total reduction of $287 billion. this can be thought of as a pessimistic prediction, perhaps driven by the sequestering effects of the gramm-rudman deficit reduction law or possibly a relaxation of tensions with the soviet union. the strategic planners in the joint chiefs of staff would construct the most effective defense program for each scenario, maximizing strengths and minimizing weaknesses. they would conclude their efforts by producing a comprehensive net assessment for each plan -- including the assumptions made, an analysis of its deficiencies and limitations, the impact on national security, and the best strategy for working around these limitations. this exercise would reveal the true cost of a particular program by forcing the strategists to make hard decisions. if, for example, they choose to keep the b-2 stealth bomber, they would have to sacrifice more and more other programs -- such as carrier battlegroups or army divisions -- as they moved toward lower budget levels. these trade-offs would evolve priorities by revealing when the cost of the b-2 became prohibitive. some may be tempted to argue that the idea of a strategic review merely resurrects the infamous zero-based budgeting (zbb) concept of the carter administration. but zbb did not involve the strategic planners in the joint chiefs of staff, and therefore degenerated into a bean-counting drill driven by budget politics. anyway, zbb's procedures were so cumbersome that everyone involved was crushed under a burden of marginalia. a strategic review is fundamentally different. it would be run by the joint chiefs under simple directions: produce the best possible force for each budget scenario and provide the secretary of defense with a comprehensive net assessment of how that force could be used to achieve u.s. goals. it might be feared that even thinking about lower budgets will hurt national security because the door will be opened to opportunistic budget cutting by an irresponsible congress. this argument plays well in the atmosphere of gaming and mistrust permeating the pentagon and congress, and unfortunately, there is some truth to it. but in the end, it must be rejected for logical as well as moral reasons. to say that the pentagon should act irresponsibly because acting responsibly will provoke congress into acting irresponsibly leads to the conclusion that the pentagon should deliberately exaggerate its needs in the national interest; in other words, that it is justified in committing a crime -- lying to congress -- because it is morally superior. strategy is not a game between the pentagon and congress; it is the art of the possible in a world where constraints force us to choose between unpleasant or imperfect alternatives. if we want meaningful priorities, we must understand the trade-offs they imply before we make commitments. strategy is not a separate event in an idealized sequence of discrete events; it is a way of thinking that neutralizes threats to our interests in a manner consistent with our financial, cultural and physical limitations. mr. spinney is a permanent pentagon official. this is a condensed version of an essay that will appear in the january issue of the naval institute proceedings. the views expressed do not reflect the official policy of the department of defense.
although bullish dollar sentiment has fizzled, many currency analysts say a massive sell-off probably won't occur in the near future. while wall street's tough times and lower u.s. interest rates continue to undermine the dollar, weakness in the pound and the yen is expected to offset those factors. "by default," the dollar probably will be able to hold up pretty well in coming days, says francoise soares-kemp, a foreign-exchange adviser at credit suisse. "we're close to the bottom" of the near-term ranges, she contends. in late friday afternoon new york trading, the dollar was at 1.8300 marks and 141.65 yen, off from late thursday's 1.8400 marks and 142.10 yen. the pound strengthened to $1.5795 from $1.5765. in tokyo monday, the u.s. currency opened for trading at 141.70 yen, down from friday's tokyo close of 142.75 yen. the dollar began friday on a firm note, gaining against all major currencies in tokyo dealings and early european trading despite reports that the bank of japan was seen unloading dollars around 142.70 yen. the rise came as traders continued to dump the pound after the sudden resignation thursday of british chancellor of the exchequer nigel lawson. but once the pound steadied with help from purchases by the bank of england and the federal reserve bank of new york, the dollar was dragged down, traders say, by the stock-market slump that left the dow jones industrial average with a loss of 17.01 points. with the stock market wobbly and dollar buyers discouraged by signs of u.s. economic weakness and the recent decline in u.s. interest rates that has diminished the attractiveness of dollar-denominated investments, traders say the dollar is still in a precarious position. "they'll be looking at levels to sell the dollar," says james scalfaro, a foreign-exchange marketing representative at bank of montreal. while some analysts say the dollar eventually could test support at 1.75 marks and 135 yen, mr. scalfaro and others don't see the currency decisively sliding under support at 1.80 marks and 140 yen soon. predictions for limited dollar losses are based largely on the pound's weak state after mr. lawson's resignation and the yen's inability to strengthen substantially when there are dollar retreats. with the pound and the yen lagging behind other major currencies, "you don't have a confirmation" that a sharp dollar downturn is in the works, says mike malpede, senior currency analyst at refco inc. in chicago. as far as the pound goes, some traders say a slide toward support at $1.5500 may be a favorable development for the dollar this week. while the pound has attempted to stabilize, currency analysts say it is in critical condition. sterling plunged about four cents thursday and hit the week's low of $1.5765 when mr. lawson resigned from his six-year post because of a policy squabble with other cabinet members. he was succeeded by john major, who friday expressed a desire for a firm pound and supported the relatively high british interest rates that he said "are working exactly as intended" in reducing inflation. but the market remains uneasy about mr. major's policy strategy and the prospects for the pound, currency analysts contend. although the bank of england's tight monetary policy has fueled worries that britain's slowing economy is headed for a recession, it is widely believed that mr. lawson's willingness to prop up the pound with interest-rate increases helped stem pound selling in recent weeks. if there are any signs that mr. major will be less inclined to use interest-rate boosts to rescue the pound from another plunge, that currency is expected to fall sharply. "it's fair to say there are more risks for the pound under major than there were under lawson," says malcolm roberts, a director of international bond market research at salomon brothers in london. "there's very little upside to sterling," mr. roberts says, but he adds that near-term losses may be small because the selling wave that followed mr. major's appointment apparently has run its course. but some other analysts have a stormier forecast for the pound, particularly because britain's inflation is hovering at a relatively lofty annual rate of about 7.6% and the nation is burdened with a struggling government and large current account and trade deficits. the pound likely will fall in coming days and may trade as low as 2.60 marks within the next year, says nigel rendell, an international economist at james capel & co. in london. the pound was at 2.8896 marks late friday, off sharply from 2.9511 in new york trading a week earlier. if the pound falls closer to 2.80 marks, the bank of england may raise britain's base lending rate by one percentage point to 16%, says mr. rendell. but such an increase, he says, could be viewed by the market as "too little too late." the bank of england indicated its desire to leave its monetary policy unchanged friday by declining to raise the official 15% discount-borrowing rate that it charges discount houses, analysts say. pound concerns aside, the lack of strong buying interest in the yen is another boon for the dollar, many traders say. the dollar has a "natural base of support" around 140 yen because the japanese currency hasn't been purchased heavily in recent weeks, says ms. soares-kemp of credit suisse. the yen's softness, she says, apparently stems from japanese investors' interest in buying dollars against the yen to purchase u.s. bond issues and persistent worries about this year's upheaval in the japanese government. on new york's commodity exchange friday, gold for current delivery jumped $5.80, to $378.30 an ounce, the highest settlement since july 12. estimated volume was a heavy seven million ounces. in early trading in hong kong monday, gold was quoted at $378.87 an ounce.
we are deeply disturbed that a recent editorial stated that the "americans with disabilities act of 1989" was "crafted primarily by democratic senators kennedy and harkin" with a premise "based on the presumption that most americans are hostile to the disabled. . . ." perhaps even more offensive is the statement, "it is surprising that george bush and the white house inner circle would ally themselves with this crabby philosophy." this legislation was not drafted by a handful of democratic "do-gooders." quite the contrary -- it results from years of work by members of the national council on the handicapped, all appointed by president reagan. you depict the bill as something democratic leaders "hoodwinked" the administration into endorsing. the opposite is true: it's the product of many meetings with administration officials, senate staffers, advocates, and business and transportation officials. many congressmen are citing the compromise on the "americans with disabilities act of 1989" as a model for bipartisan deliberations. most national council members are themselves disabled or are parents of children with disabilities. we know firsthand the discrimination addressed by the act: to be told there's no place for your child in school; to spend lonely hours at home because there is no transportation for someone in a wheelchair; to be denied employment because you are disabled. your editorial mockingly entitles this legislation the "lawyers' employment act." for the 43 million people with disabilities and their families, this legislation is the "emancipation proclamation." sandra swift parrino chairperson national council on the handicapped washington
a group of investors led by giant group ltd. and its chairman, burt sugarman, said it filed with federal antitrust regulators for clearance to buy more than 50% of the stock of rally's inc., a fast-food company based in louisville, ky. rally's operates and franchises about 160 fast-food restaurants throughout the u.s. the company went public earlier this month, offering 1,745,000 shares of common stock at $15 a share. giant has interests in cement making and newsprint. the investor group includes restaurant investment partnership, a california general partnership, and three rally's directors: mr. sugarman, james m. trotter iii and william e. trotter ii. the group currently holds 3,027,330 rally's shares, or 45.2% of its commmon shares outstanding. giant group owned 22% of rally's shares before the initial public offering. a second group of three company directors, aligned with rally's founder james patterson, also is seeking control of the fast-food chain. it is estimated that the patterson group controls more than 40% of rally's stock. rally officials weren't available to comment late yesterday. for the year ended july 2, rally had net income of $2.4 million, or 34 cents a share, on revenue of $52.9 million.
companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts' estimates. the companies are followed by at least three analysts, and had a minimum five-cent change in actual earnings per share. estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted. the percent difference compares actual profit with the 30-day estimate where at least three analysts have issues forecasts in the past 30 days. otherwise, actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate. source: zacks investment research
dpc acquisition partners, a hostile suitor for dataproducts corp., filed a petition in federal district court in los angeles seeking to have its standstill agreement with the computer printer maker declared void, and it proceeded with a $10-a-share tender offer for the company. the offer would give the transaction an indicated value of $189 million, based on the 18.9 million shares the group doesn't already own. dpc holds about 7.8% of dataproducts' shares. lawyers representing dpc declined to elaborate, saying they didn't have a final copy of the filing. jack davis, dataproducts' chairman, said he hadn't yet seen the filing and couldn't comment. dpc made a $15-a-share bid for the company in may, but dataproducts management considered the $283.7 million proposal unacceptable. dataproducts had sought a buyer for several months, but it is now in the midst of a restructuring plan and management says the company is no longer for sale.
appalachian power co., a subsidiary of american electric power co., said it will redeem on dec. 1 the entire $44.2 million of its 12 7/8% first mortgage bonds due 2013. the redemption price will be 109.66% of the principal amount of the bonds, plus accrued interest to the date of redemption.
the european community's consumer price index rose a provisional 0.6% in september from august and was up 5.3% from september 1988, according to eurostat, the ec's statistical agency. the month-to-month rise in the index was the largest since april, eurostat said.
westinghouse electric corp. said it will buy shaw-walker co. terms weren't disclosed. shaw-walker, based in muskegon, mich., makes metal files and desks, and seating and office systems furniture.
israel has launched a new effort to prove the palestine liberation organization continues to practice terrorism, and thus to persuade the u.s. to break off talks with the group. u.s. officials, however, said they aren't buying the israeli argument. israeli counterterrorism officials provided the state department with a 20-page list of recent terrorist incidents they attribute directly to forces controlled by plo chairman yasser arafat. mr. arafat publicly renounced terrorism dec. 15, satisfying the u.s. precondition for a direct "dialogue" with the plo. a u.s. counterterrorism official said experts are studying the israeli list. "we have no independent evidence linking fatah to any acts of terrorism since dec. 15, 1988," he said, referring to the specific plo group that mr. arafat heads. "so far, this list doesn't change our view. israel wants to end the dialogue, but our analysts take a different view than theirs." israeli prime minister yitzhak shamir's top adviser on counterterrorism, yigal carmon, was here monday to present the report to members of congress, reporters and others. mr. carmon said he also presented the list last week to william brown, u.s. ambassador to israel. separately, the new york times reported that the israeli government had provided its correspondent in jerusalem with different documents that israel said prove the plo has been conducting terrorism from the occupied arab territories. the state department said it hasn't yet seen copies of those papers. "if the dialogue was based on the assumption that arafat or the plo would stop terrorism, and we have evidence of continued terrorism, what would be the logical conclusion?" mr. carmon asked. israel has long claimed mr. arafat never meant to renounce terrorism, particularly because he and his lieutenants reserved the right to press "armed struggle" against the jewish state. now, jerusalem says it is backing up its contention with detailed accounts of alleged terrorist acts and plans linked to mr. arafat. it blames most of these on fatah. the new accusations come at a delicate time in u.s. efforts to bring about talks between israel and palestinian representatives. the state department said it had received a new letter on the subject from israeli foreign minister moshe arens, restating israel's previous objection to negotiating with any palestinian tied to the plo. deciding what constitutes "terrorism" can be a legalistic exercise. the u.s. defines it as "premediated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine state agents." to meet the u.s. criteria, israel contended it only listed incidents that involved civilians and occurred inside its pre-1967 borders. at the heart of israel's report is a list of a dozen incidents jerusalem attributes to fatah, including the use of bombs and molotov cocktails. but u.s. officials say they aren't satisfied these incidents constitute terrorism because they may be offshoots of the intifadah, the palestinian rebellion in the occupied territories, which the u.s. doesn't classify as terrorism. in addition, the officials say israel hasn't presented convincing evidence these acts were ordered by fatah or by any group mr. arafat controls. u.s. terrorism experts also say they are highly uncertain about the veracity of the separate documents leaked to the new york times. the papers, which israel says were discovered in israeli-occupied gaza, refer to terrorist acts to be carried out in the name of a group called "the revolutionary eagles." some supporters of israel say u.s. policy on palestinian terrorism is colored by an intense desire to maintain the dialogue with the plo. but state department officials accuse israel of leaking questionable claims to embarrass the u.s.
the dollar finished lower yesterday, after tracking another rollercoaster session on wall street. concern about the volatile u.s. stock market had faded in recent sessions, and traders appeared content to let the dollar languish in a narrow range until tomorrow, when the preliminary report on third-quarter u.s. gross national product is released. but seesaw gyrations in the dow jones industrial average yesterday put wall street back in the spotlight and inspired market participants to bid the u.s. unit lower. ual's decision to remain an independent company sent share prices tumbling. by midmorning, the djia had plunged 80 points and foreign-exchange dealers quickly drove the dollar down. when the djia modestly rebounded, the dollar bounced back in choppy dealings but ended the day below the levels of late monday. stock prices, meanwhile, posted significant gains in later trading and closed down by only 3.69 points on the day. some dealers said that the market's strong reaction to wall street reflects a general uneasiness about the dollar. they added that the djia's swift drop proved an easy excuse for the market to drive the u.s. currency in the direction it was already headed. in late new york trading yesterday, the dollar was quoted at 1.8355 marks, down from 1.8470 marks monday, and at 141.45 yen, down from 141.90 yen late monday. sterling was quoted at $1.6055, up from $1.6030 late monday. in tokyo wednesday, the u.s. currency opened for trading at 141.57 yen, down from tuesday's tokyo close of 142.10 yen. tom trettien, a vice president with banque paribas in new york, sees a break in the dollar's long-term upward trend, a trend that began in january 1988. he argues that the dollar is now "moving sideways," adding that "the next leg could be the beginning of a longer term bearish phase." analysts peg the dollar's recent weakness to an underlying slowdown in the u.s. economy, highlighted by recent economic data, particularly a surprisingly sharp widening in the august u.s. trade gap. they also point out that narrowing interest-rate differentials between the u.s. and its major trading partners tend to make the u.s. currency less attractive to foreign investors. despite several spurts of dollar trading, it was noted that mark-yen cross trade grabbed much of the market's attention. following the dive in u.s. stocks, the mark has strengthened more than its major counterparts. traders attribute the mark's surge to a robust west german economy and higher rate differentials. but, they add that the mark's strength is in part a reflection of a shift away from u.s. assets by japanese investors into west german investments. "the question remains: how much can the west german market absorb?" says one senior dealer. some dealers say that bank of japan governor satoshi sumita's reassurance that japanese monetary policy won't be changed for the time being has given investors an added excuse to push the yen down even further against the mark. despite the yen's weakness with respect to the mark, tokyo traders say they don't expect the bank of japan to take any action to support the japanese currency on that front. meanwhile, sterling slumped on news that the united kingdom posted a wider-than-expected trade deficit in september. the news also knocked the british unit to below 2.95 marks in london, but a bout of short-covering helped sterling recoup some of its earlier losses. on the commodity exchange in new york, gold for current delivery jumped $3.20 to $370.20 an ounce. the close was the highest since aug. 15. estimated volume was a light two million ounces. in early trading in hong kong wednesday, gold was quoted at $368.25 an ounce.
boston co., the upper-crust financial services concern that was rocked by a management scandal late last year, has had a sharp drop in profitability -- mainly because a high-risk bet on interest rates backfired. boston co. 's fall from grace is bad news for its parent, shearson lehman hutton holdings inc., which has relied heavily on the banking and money management unit's contributions in recent years. in 1988, for example, boston co. had an estimated pretax profit of at least $110 million, while shearson managed net income of just $96 million. shearson doesn't break out the earnings of its subsidiaries. but people familiar with boston co. 's performance say the unit had profit of around $17 million for the third quarter, after barely breaking even for the first six months. shearson, meanwhile, posted net income of $106 million for the first nine months of the year, down slightly from $110 million for the year-ago period. moody's investors service inc. last week downgraded the long-term deposit rating of boston co. 's boston safe deposit & trust co. subsidiary, to single-a-1 from double-a-3, citing problems in the company's "aggressively managed securities portfolio." john kriz, a moody's vice president, said boston safe deposit's performance has been hurt this year by a mismatch in the maturities of its assets and liabilities. the mismatch exposed the company to a high degree of interest-rate risk, and when rates moved unfavorably -- beginning late last year and continuing into this year -- "it cost them," mr. kriz said. mr. kriz noted that boston safe deposit "has taken some actions to better control asset-liability management and improve controls in general, and we think these will serve to improve credit quality." as some securities mature and the proceeds are reinvested, the problems ought to ease, he said. but he also cited concerns over the company's mortgage exposure in the troubled new england real estate market. boston co. officials declined to comment on moody's action or on the unit's financial performance this year -- except to deny a published report that outside accountants had discovered evidence of significant accounting errors in the first three quarters' results. an accounting controversy at the end of last year forced boston co. to admit it had overstated pretax profits by some $44 million. the resulting scandal led to the firing of james n. von germeten as boston co. 's president and to the resignations of the company's chief financial officer and treasurer. the executives were accused of improperly deferring expenses and booking revenue early, in an effort to dress up results -- and perhaps bolster performance-related bonuses. mr. von germeten, in turn, attributed the controversy to judgmental errors by accountants and accused shearson of conducting a "witch hunt." mr. kriz of moody's said the problems in the securities portfolio stem largely from positions taken last year. the company's current management found itself "locked into this," he said.
mexico exported an average of 1,296,800 barrels of crude oil a day at an average of $15.31 a barrel during 1989's first eight months for a total of $4.82 billion, petroleos mexicanos s.a. said. the state petroleum monopoly said sales in the period gained 15%, and $262.4 million more than originally projected at an average of $10 a barrel on an export platform of 1,250,000 barrels a day.
chicago - sears, roebuck & co. is struggling as it enters the critical christmas season. yesterday, the retailing and financial services giant reported a 16% drop in third-quarter earnings to $257.5 million, or 75 cents a share, from a restated $305 million, or 80 cents a share, a year earlier. but the news was even worse for sears's core u.s. retailing operation, the largest in the nation. sears said its u.s. stores had a loss of $6.9 million, their first deficit for the period in more than five years. analysts estimated that sales at u.s. stores declined in the quarter, too. the results underscore sears's difficulties in implementing the "everyday low pricing" strategy that it adopted in march as part of a broad attempt to revive its retailing business. under the new approach, sears set prices that were somewhere between its old "regular" and "sale" prices. the company said it would resort far less often to slashing prices to woo shoppers. sears officials insist they don't intend to abandon the everyday pricing approach in the face of the poor results. instead, a spokesman blames the dismal third-quarter showing on "an environment that is being distorted by a very harsh climate for sales of durable goods," which account for roughly two-thirds of sears's annual merchandise volume. the new pricing strategy "is working," the spokesman asserted. he added that, after an initial surge triggered by an advertising blitz in march, sears expected that the pricing program wouldn't have any effect on revenue. sears has been counting on growth coming from the large displays of brand-name merchandise it is adding to its stores over the next two years in what it calls "power formats." but analysts say sears faces an especially daunting challenge on the eve of the christmas shopping season. "i believe everyday pricing in the current environment doesn't work," says walter loeb of morgan stanley & co., pointing to soft durable-goods sales. "sears is likely to be unsuccessful if it continues with its pricing policy when everyone else is offering unusual values." in what amounts to an admission that the transition hasn't gone as smoothly as sears had hoped, the giant retailer is now trying new ways to drum up business without appearing to abandon its seven-month-old strategy. the company is highlighting more special deals in its advertising and stores, and it's offering to defer finance charges on certain big-ticket items. sears is also stepping up its television ads and changing its message. in a new tv ad, for instance, a woman going through the sunday newspaper brands as hype claims by other stores that they are offering goods for "50%, 60% and 70% off." by lowering prices throughout its stores, she says, "sears has the right idea." but the ad also mentions sears's sales -- a topic that the retailer has avoided since switching to everyday pricing. "when sears has a sale at a special price," the woman in the ad declares, "it's something you don't want to miss." recent surveys by leo j. shapiro & associates, a market research firm in chicago, suggest that sears is having a tough time attracting shoppers because it hasn't yet done enough to improve service or its selection of merchandise. the number of people who said they were more likely to shop at sears fell in september to 37% from 66% in march, when sears blanketed the airwaves with ads about its new pricing strategy. moreover, the number of people who spontaneously cited lower prices as the reason for their interest in sears declined to 16% in september from 33% in march. just 5% of the respondents mentioned brands in september, up slightly from 2% in march. only 2% of the people in september cited sears's "friendly personnel." "the power of price as an appeal, which was very considerable in driving traffic in march and april, has diminished," says george rosenbaum, president of shapiro & associates. "you see some improvement in these other areas, but it's a very small and slow process." for the third quarter, sears said its total revenue rose 4.8% to $13.18 billion from $12.57 billion a year earlier. net income at sears's merchandise group, which includes international and credit card operations, as well as u.s. stores, fell 25%. profit at sears's allstate insurance unit fell 38% to $126.1 million because of hurricane hugo, which inflicted the greatest single storm damage loss in the company's history. sears said claims from the storm, as expected, reduced its third-quarter net by $80 million, or 23 cents a share. allstate is expected to absorb another big hit in the fourth quarter as claims pour in from the san francisco earthquake. but a spokesman said the quake won't have as big a financial impact on allstate as hurricane hugo did. net income at sears's dean witter financials services group, meanwhile, rose nearly 32% to $35.7 million, reflecting improvements in its basic stock brokerage and discover credit card businesses. profit at sears's coldwell banker real estate group nearly quadrupled to $81.2 million because of gains on sales of property. in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday, sears shares closed at $40.50, up 87.5 cents.
oil imports to japan rose 12% in september from year-earlier levels, according to statistics released by the government's ministry of international trade and industry. the imports, totaling 98.5 million barrels, were 11% lower than august levels. the year-on-year rise was partly because of higher demand for petroleum products, and partly because of tax changes in 1988 that left oil companies with high inventories in the late-summer/early-fall period. imports of crude from the middle east grew 17% from year-earlier levels, and southeast asian crude imports grew 43%. while mideast crude imports were higher compared with year-earlier levels, they fell 18% compared with august imports. southeast asian crude imports, however, were 3.6% higher than august.
this is in response to george melloan's business world column "the housing market is a bigger mess than you think" (op-ed page, sept. 26). in houston, we have seen how bad the housing problem can become. unused houses deteriorate rapidly, affecting the value of nearby homes; in a domino effect, the entire neighborhood can fall victim. at this stage some people just "walk away" from homes where the mortgage exceeds current market value. but most of them could have afforded to keep up their payments -- they chose not to do so. the problem is so vast that we need to try innovative solutions -- in small-scale experiments. here are some ideas: 1) foreclosed homes could be sold by the fha for no down payment (the biggest obstacle to young buyers), but with personal liability for the mortgage (no walking away by choice). 2) encourage long-term occupancy by forgiving one month's payment (off the tail end of the mortgage) for every six months paid; or perhaps have the down payment deferred to the end of the mortgage (balloon), but "forgiven" on a monthly pro-rata basis as long as the owner remains the occupant. 3) develop rental agreements with exclusive purchase options for the renter. an occupant will, in most every case, be better for the home and neighborhood than a vacant house. in this way, the house is not dumped on to a glutted market. john f. merrill houston the federal housing administration, veterans administration and the department of housing and urban development further aggravate the problem of affordable housing stock by "buying in" to their foreclosed properties (of which there are, alas, many) at an inflated "balance due" -- say $80,000 on a house worth $55,000 -- instead of allowing a free market to price the house for what it's really worth. worse, the properties then sit around deteriorating for maybe a year or so, but are resold eventually (because of the attractiveness of the low down payment, etc.) to a marginal buyer who can't afford both the mortgage and needed repairs; and having little vested interest that buyer will walk away and the vicious cycle repeats itself all over again. paul padget cincinnati
italy's unemployment rate rose to 12% of the labor force in july from 11.9% in april, and was up from 11.7% a year earlier, according to quarterly figures from the state statistical institute. istat said a national survey during the first week of july showed the number of job seekers was 2,888,000 up from 2,822,000 in april, and from 2,853,000 a year ago. the unemployment rate was by far the highest in the southern, so-called mezzogiorno region. the southern unemployment rate rose to 21.3% in july from 21.2% in april and from 20.6% a year earlier. istat said 369,000 more people were employed in july than in april.
xerox corp. 's third-quarter net income grew 6.2% on 7.3% higher revenue, earning mixed reviews from wall street analysts. quarter net for the business-machines and financial-services company rose to $155 million, or $1.41 a share, from $146 million, or $1.37 a share, in the year-earlier period. revenue rose to $4.45 billion from $4.15 billion. in new york stock exchange composite trading, xerox closed at $62.75 a share, up $1. sales growth and profit in business products and systems -- xerox's main business -- were "disappointing," said b. alex henderson, who follows the company for prudential-bache securities inc. sales of xerox copiers and other office products grew 1.6%; "we expected growth of 6% to 7%," mr. henderson said. operating-profit margins slipped almost 18%, to 4.3% of sales, the analyst noted. still, with competitors such as eastman kodak co. faltering in copier sales, xerox's sales increases "were encouraging," says eugene glazer of dean witter reynolds inc. "they are holding their own in a weak market, and the restructuring is working," he says. david t. kearns, xerox chairman and chief executive officer, cited the restructuring and "strong" cost controls for the 13% growth in profit from business products and systems operations. mr. glazer expects xerox to experience tough sledding, though, in financial services because of rate pressures and uncertainty surrounding tax treatment of capital gains. in the quarter, the crum & forster insurance unit reported $200 million before tax of capital gains from property and casualty operations. the subsidiary also increased reserves by $140 million, however, and set aside an additional $25 million for claims connected with hurricane hugo. for the nine months, xerox earned $492 million, or $4.55 a share, up 5.8% from $465 million, or $4.32 a share. revenue rose 7.6% to $12.97 billion from $12.05 billion.
new orders for durable goods fell back slightly in september after shooting up the month before, reflecting weakening auto demand after a spurt of orders for new 1990 models, the commerce department reported. orders for military equipment, household appliances, machinery and other goods expected to last at least three years dipped 0.1% last month, to $126.68 billion, after leaping 3.9% in august, the department said. most analysts had expected a sharper decline after the steep rise in august. moreover, a recent government report showing widespread layoffs in manufacturing had contributed to perceptions that the manufacturing sector of the economy had slowed to a crawl. but many economists pointed to a 1.8% september rise in orders outside the volatile transportation category. that "suggests the manufacturing sector is not falling apart," said sally kleinman, an economist at manufacturers hanover securities corp. in new york. she added, however: "it is not robust by any means." while a decline in orders for cars and civilian airplanes pulled down the orders total, an enormous jump in orders for heavy military equipment propped it up. orders for capital defense goods skyrocketed 56%, and a government analyst said nearly all areas saw increases, including airplanes, missiles, ships, tanks and communications equipment. orders for military goods usually catapult in september, government officials say, as the pentagon scrambles to spend its money before the new fiscal year begins oct. 1. while all the numbers in the durable goods report were adjusted for seasonal fluctuations, a commerce department analyst said that the adjustment probably didn't factor out all of the wide-ranging surge in defense orders. without the increase in defense bookings, september orders would have plummeted 3.9%. analysts were most unsettled by evidence the backlog of orders at factories is slipping. unfilled orders for durable goods rose 0.4% in september, to $476.14 billion, after declining for the first time in 2 1/2 years in august. in july unfilled orders grew 1%. but analysts noted that excluding transportation- where what they believe was a temporary surge in auto demand pushed up the figures- order backlogs have declined for three months in a row. "it means we're eating into the bread that keeps us going. that is a little disturbing," ms. kleinman said. "it also means if you have a real drop-off in orders, production will likely fall off very quickly because there is less to keep things going." capital goods orders outside of the defense sector tumbled for the second month in a row, posting a 5.6% drop after a 10.3% decline. such steep drops in a category seen as a barometer of business investment would customarily be grave news for the economy. but a commerce department analyst said that in both months orders would have risen had it not been for a drop in civilian aircraft bookings, a category that is showing declines only after a huge surge earlier this year. still, milton hudson, senior economic adviser at morgan guaranty trust co. in new york, said: "if you look back a half-year or so the evidence was pretty good of affirmative strength in the capital-goods sector. now at least there are question marks about that, and without any question the pace of growth has slowed."
norfolk southern corp. directors authorized the railroad company to buy back as many as 45 million of its shares, which would have a current value of more than $1.7 billion. the buy-back, coupled with a nearly completed earlier purchase of 20 million shares, would reduce shares outstanding by more than 26%. the norfolk, va., company has 172.2 million shares outstanding. in a statement, arnold b. mckinnon, chairman and chief executive officer, noted that the new repurchase program "should serve to enhance shareholder value." a spokeswoman said the company will finance the buy-back with cash on hand, borrowing and "cash norfolk expects to generate." analysts said they expected the action, and investors applauded the move. in composite trading on the new york stock exchange, norfolk southern shares closed at $37.875, up $1.125. still, analysts don't expect the buy-back to significantly affect per-share earnings in the short term. "the impact won't be that great," said graeme lidgerwood of first boston corp. that is in part because of the effect of having to average the number of shares outstanding, she said. in addition, mrs. lidgerwood said, norfolk is likely to draw down its cash initially to finance the purchases and thus forfeit some interest income. longer term, however, the buy-back is expected to increase earnings, especially after 1990, mrs. lidgerwood said. moreover, the extensive program in effect establishes a floor for the stock price, said joel price, analyst for donaldson, lufkin & jenrette. the buy-back "is really a comfort to those who want to buy the stock that there is a {price} floor," he said. "at a certain price, if the management thinks {the stock} is cheap, they can go in and buy it." under the program, norfolk plans to acquire shares in the open market. under the earlier plan, norfolk was authorized in 1987 to buy up to 20 million shares. it has purchased about 19 million of them.
john b. curcio, 55 years old, resigned as chairman of this diesel truck manufacturer, effective upon appointment of a successor. last month, mr. curcio was succeeded by ralph e. reins as chief executive officer following several quarters of lackluster or declining performance.
richard w. lock, retired vice president and treasurer of owens-illinois inc., was named a director of this transportation industry supplier, increasing its board to six members.
usx corp. said it delayed the proposed initial public offering of common stock of rmi titanium co. because of market conditions. rmi titanium is owned jointly by usx and quantum chemical corp. usx, which hadn't set a date for the offering, didn't disclose any timetable for the offering.
your oct. 2 editorial "reding, wrighting & erithmatic" on the recent "education summit" was like most pieces on the subject of education: it had little to say. oddly, though, on the very same page you printed a comment that addresses one of the most serious shortcomings of the american education system. unfortunately, the comment was buried in another article, so it could not stand out in an education context. in the manager's journal, atsushi kageyama, in commenting on many differences between american and japanese culture, said, "japanese children are raised in a way many americans would find severe. after a wonderfully frivolous early childhood, they are exposed to rigid discipline as soon as they enter school." what far too many people concerned about education either fail to understand or choose to ignore is that american children, on the whole, are among the most undisciplined in the world, making any attempt at improvements in the mode of education potentially unsuccessful. unless parents and educators alike start to develop more discipline in children, all the worthy concern, discussions and actions will not solve the problem. allen b. richards peterborough, n.h.
retired adm. william j. crowe, former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, and robert p. luciano, chairman and chief executive officer of schering-plough corp., were elected directors of this securities firm. the board expanded to 17 seats.
tuesday, october 24, 1989 the key u.s. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but don't always represent actual transactions. prime rate: 10 1/2%. the base rate on corporate loans at large u.s. money center commercial banks. federal funds: 8 3/4% high, 8 5/8% low, 8 11/16% near closing bid, 8 11/16% offered. reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $1 million or more. source: fulton prebon (u.s.a.) inc. discount rate: 7%. the charge on loans to depository institutions by the new york federal reserve bank. call money: 9 3/4% to 10%. the charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral. commercial paper placed directly by general motors acceptance corp.: 8.45% 30 to 44 days; 8.25% 45 to 68 days; 8.30% 69 to 89 days; 8.125% 90 to 119 days; 8% 120 to 149 days; 7.875% 150 to 179 days; 7.50% 180 to 270 days. commercial paper: high-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $1,000: 8.55% 30 days; 8.475% 60 days; 8.45% 90 days. certificates of deposit: 8.09% one month; 8.09% two months; 8.06% three months; 8% six months; 7.94% one year. average of top rates paid by major new york banks on primary new issues of negotiable c.d.s, usually on amounts of $1 million and more. the minimum unit is $100,000. typical rates in the secondary market: 8.55% one month; 8.50% three months; 8.35% six months. bankers acceptances: 8.48% 30 days; 8.30% 60 days; 8.28% 90 days; 8.10% 120 days; 8% 150 days; 7.90% 180 days. negotiable, bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order. london late eurodollars: 8 11/16% to 8 9/16% one month; 8 5/8% to 8 1/2% two months; 8 5/8% to 8 1/2% three months; 8 9/16% to 8 7/16% four months; 8 1/2% to 8 3/8% five months; 8 7/16% to 8 5/16% six months. london interbank offered rates (libor): 8 11/16% one month; 8 11/16% three months; 8 1/2% six months; 8 1/2% one year. the average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the london market based on quotations at five major banks. foreign prime rates: canada 13.50%; germany 9%; japan 4.875%; switzerland 8.50%; britain 15%. these rate indications aren't directly comparable; lending practices vary widely by location. treasury bills: results of the monday, october 23, 1989, auction of short-term u.s. government bills, sold at a discount from face value in units of $10,000 to $1 million: 7.52% 13 weeks; 7.50% 26 weeks. federal home loan mortgage corp. (freddie mac): posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days. 9.78%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 7.875%, 2% rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. federal national mortgage association (fannie mae): posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days (priced at par) 9.75%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 8.70%, 6/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. merrill lynch ready assets trust: 8.59%. annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days; not a forecast of future returns.
roy e. parrott, the company's president and chief operating officer since sept. 1, was named to its board. the appointment increased the number of directors to 10, three of whom are company employees. simpson is an auto parts maker.
japan has climbed up from the ashes of world war ii and a gross national product of about $800 per capita to reach the heavyweight class among industrialized nations. now this remarkable economic growth seems to be coming to an end because the government has not converted itself into a modern, democratic, "developed nation" mode of operation. until 1980, when japan joined the $10,000 per capita gnp club of the advanced countries, it was a model developing nation. the government built ports, bridges, highways, schools, hospitals and railways. when industries were weak, it protected them. it gave the japanese people a value system, based on the rationalization that given the country's lack of natural resources, they must work hard to create value through exports and buy food with the surplus. individual prosperity inevitably would result. that system has worked. the standard of living has increased steadily over the past 40 years; more than 90% of the people consider themselves middle class. the people have given their leading and only credible political party, the liberal democratic party, clear and uninterrupted power for those 40 years. the ldp won by a landslide in the last election, in july 1986. but less than two years later, the ldp started to crumble, and dissent rose to unprecedented heights. the symptoms all point to one thing: japan does not have a modern government. its government still wants to sit in the driver's seat, set the speed, step on the gas, apply the brakes and steer, with 120 million people in the back seat. in a modern system, the government's role is to give the people as much choice as possible and to keep them well informed so they are capable of making a choice. it also allows people to buy the best and the cheapest goods from anywhere in the world. the japanese government doesn't allow this. the ministry of agriculture and fishery actually is a ministry for farmers and fishermen instead of a ministry of provisions. the ministry of health and welfare is a ministry of doctors and pharmaceutical companies rather than an organization dedicated to protecting the health of the people. the ministry of education is nothing but a cartel for licensed teachers, and certainly does not act on behalf of students. the ministry of construction spreads concrete throughout the country and boasts in international conferences that japan's paved roadway per capita is the longest in the world, but they seldom think of the poor commuters who spend so much time sitting in traffic. the ministry of transportation serves the industry, certainly not the passengers who must pay extraordinarily high prices. and the ministry of foreign affairs works for itself, supporting japanese diplomats who sprinkle abundant aid money around the world to ensure that their seat at the dinner table is next to the host's. this ministry has done nothing to correct the misunderstandings and misperceptions that are at the root of japan's deteriorating image. instead, it seems to be using foreign pressure and even the trade conflict to expand its sphere of influence vis a vis other ministries. all this illustrates that japanese ministries still have a "provider" mentality; they do not serve the people, and particularly not consumers. they serve the industries and the special-interest groups. the rest of the world accepted such methods when japan was developing. japanese put up with it because the government provided job stability and growing paychecks. japan is not a political country. it is a bureaucratic country. the diet plays a minor role compared with the powerful bureaucratic system. most bills are drafted by bureaucrats, not politicians. the diet doesn't normally even debate bills because the opposition parties are so often opposed to whatever ldp does that it would be a waste of time. so most bills are passed without full discussion; particularly difficult bills are passed in the absence of the opposition parties. a recent example is the 3% consumption tax on all commercial activities. this makes enormous sense in japan, where direct tax accounts for more than 70% of revenues and the capture rate of direct tax is so unfair. if you are a salaried man, amen! 100% captured. if you are a retailer, 50%, and a farmer, 30%. to correct this inequality, most people would have favored an indirect tax, like the consumption tax. but the bill was passed without debate in the diet, in the absence of the opposition. as a result, the japanese people didn't know what to expect when the new law was introduced on april 1. they were frustrated by the longer queues at the cashier and the small coins given as change. all of a sudden, prices were no longer in denominations of 100 or 200. they were 103 or 206. pockets exploded with one-yen coins. while people were jingling their change, the ldp politicians were caught in scandals. money, such as in recruit's political donations, and women, as in the cases of prime minister sosuke uno and secretary general tokuo yamashita, seldom have caused political scandals in japan. whereas most men were a bit ambivalent about the sex scandals (though they were furious about recruit), women were upset about both and surged to the polls. in the recent upper house and tokyo metropolitan congressional elections, in which the socialist party won a runaway victory, 60% of all women voted, as opposed to the usual 40%. it is difficult to analyze how much of their anger was due to recruit, the sex scandals, or the one-yen coins in their purses, but they obviously were voting to punish the ldp. taken by surprise, the socialist party is busy changing its doctrines. it's now ok to deal with the u.s., but not the soviet union. nuclear power plants are acceptable. the u.s.-japan security treaty can continue, sort of. and so on. against the rapid cosmetic overhaul of the socialist party the ldp has been paralyzed. now is the time to reform the government from a provider, developing-country vanguard role to that of a modern, industrialized nation in which consumers have the ultimate choice. if the ldp, as currently composed, can't make the transformation, then it should split into two parties. one party could stand for consumer interests, small government, free trade and globalism to put japan clearly among the most developed and open countries. the other party could continue on the traditional track of the ldp, representing the manufacturers' preference for larger government, control, regulation and protectionism. the ldp must make a decision immediately; lower house elections must take place before june. in the current mood of the japanese people, journalists and even some industrialists, giving power to the socialists might be good for the ldp, cleansing it of past sins. we must not forget, however, that such a humble political experiment could cause a global tidal wave of shocks in real-estate and financial markets. at the most there is only nine months before the ldp fuse burns out. mr. ohmae is managing director of mckinsey & co. in japan.
early this century, diamond mining in the magnificent dunes where the namib desert meets the atlantic ocean was a day at the beach. men would crawl in the sand looking for shiny stones. it was as easy as collecting sea shells at malibu. men are still combing the beach with shovels and hand brushes, searching for that unusual glint. but only after a fleet of 336 gargantuan earthmoving vehicles belonging to de beers consolidated mines ltd., the world's diamond kingpins, do their work. last year, 43 million tons of desert were moved from one dune to another to recover 934,242 carats, which comes to 46 tons of sand per carat, or one-fifth gram. oh yes, the atlantic was also pushed back 300 yards. "if there's diamonds out there, we'll get to them," says les johns, de beers's engineering manager. here, wedged between shifting dunes and pounding waves at the world's most inhospitable diamond dig, lies the earth's most precious jewel box. thanks to centuries of polishing by mother nature -- first in the gentle current of the orange river that carried the stones from south africa's interior, then in the cold surf of the ocean, and finally in the coarse sands of the desert -- 98% of the diamonds uncovered are of gem quality. while other mines might yield more carats, a higher percentage of them go to industrial use. since this treasure chest is too big to fit in a bank vault, it has been turned into one. months after railway worker zacharias lewala first picked up a diamond from the sand in 1908, the german colonialists who controlled namibia proclaimed a wide swath of the desert -- about 200 miles north from the orange river and 60 miles inland from the atlantic -- a restricted area, a designation normally reserved for military operations. when the germans lost world war i, they lost namibia to south africa and the diamonds to ernest oppenheimer, patriarch of anglo american corp. and de beers. today, no one gets in or out of the restricted area without de beers's stingy approval. the mining zone has thus remained one of the most desolate places in africa. ghost towns dot the namib dunes, proving diamonds aren't forever. oranjemund, the mine headquarters, is a lonely corporate oasis of 9,000 residents. jackals roam the streets at night, and gemsbok, hardy antelope with long straight horns, wander in from the desert to drink from water sprinklers. on most days, the desert's heat and the cool of the ocean combine to create a mist like a damp rag. the wind, stinging with sand, never seems to stop. still, miners from all parts of namibia as well as professional staff from de beers's head offices in south africa and london keep coming. and oranjemund boasts attractions besides diamonds. there are six video rental shops, three restaurants, one cinema and 34 sports and recreation clubs for everything from cricket to lawn bowling. the pride of oranjemund is the 18-hole golf course -- with the largest sand trap in the world. last year, when the rising orange river threatened to swamp the course, the same engineers who are pushing back the atlantic rushed to build a wall to hold back the flood. "nothing is too good for our golf course," says tony george, a mining engineer. despite fears the mine may be partially nationalized by the new namibian government following next month's elections freeing the country from south african control, de beers engineers are working to extend the mine's productive life for another 25 years, from the current estimate of 10. huge machines that look as though they came from the star wars desert-battle scene lumber among the dunes. mechanized vacuum cleaners probe the sand like giant anteaters; a whirring ferris wheellike excavator, with buckets instead of seats, chews through layers of compacted sand; tracks and conveyor belts, shuttling sand to the screening plants, criss-cross the beach. then there is the artifical sea wall, 600 yards long and 60 yards thick, jutting into the ocean. made of sand, it receives around-the-clock maintainence against the battering waves. when the mining in front of the wall is complete, it is moved northward. a companion jetty that helps hold back the sea looks like a rusting junkyard. engineers first used concrete blocks to bolster the barrier, but the ocean tossed them aside like driftwood. then someone decided to try broken-down earthmoving equipment that, inexplicably, held against the waves. "the caterpillar people aren't too happy when they see their equipment used like that," shrugs mr. george. "they figure it's not a very good advert." despite all these innovations, most of the diamonds are still found in the sand swept away by the men wielding shovels and brushes -- the ignominiously named "bedrock sweepers" who toil in the wake of the excavators. laboring in blue and gray overalls, they are supposed to concentrate on cleaning out crevices, and not strain their eyes looking for diamonds. but should they spy one, the company will pay a bonus equal to one-third its value. for these workers at the bottom of the mine's pay scale, this is usually enough to overcome the temptation to steal -- a crime that could earn them up to 15 years in jail. still, employees do occasionally try to smuggle out a gem or two. one man wrapped several diamonds in the knot of his tie. another poked a hole in the heel of his shoe. a food caterer stashed stones in the false bottom of a milk pail. none made it past the body searches and x-rays of mine security.
disaster states aren't jumping to raise taxes for relief and recovery. not yet, anyway. just after hurricane hugo battered south carolina, some officials talked of perhaps adding a penny to the state gasoline tax or raising property taxes. gov. campbell responded, "they're mentioning rope when there's been a hanging in the family." a spokesman says the governor believes he can avoid increases by relying on federal aid and shifting funds in state programs. still, hugo's impact may revive unsuccessful proposals to give local governments authority to levy sales taxes. a spokesman for north carolina gov. martin says hugo hasn't prompted proposals for state or local increases. california, where earthquake damage may top $5 billion, plans a special legislative session. property-tax relief is likely. legislators are talking about temporary rises in sales or gasoline taxes, although gov. deukmejian says they should be a last resort. needs aren't clear, and the state constitution makes increasing taxes and spending very difficult. but some legislators think the time may be ripe to revise the constitution. the irs will pay if its error burdens you with bank charges. policy statement p-5-39 sets out terms. as a result of an erroneous irs levy on a bank account, a taxpayer may incur administrative and overdraft charges. if the irs admits its error and the charges have been paid, it will reimburse a taxpayer who hasn't refused to give timely answers to irs inquiries or hasn't contributed to continuing or compounding the error. the irs recently amended the policy to cover stop-payment charges for checks lost by the irs. if the irs asks for and gets a replacement for a check that it concedes it lost in processing, it will reimburse the taxpayer for the stop-payment charge on the original. reimbursement claims must be filed with the irs district or service-center director within a year after the expense accrues. if the irs seeks late-payment interest because of the lost check, you should request interest abatement, publisher prentice hall notes. just five acres more are all we need to feel really at home, they say. a couple we'll call the blandings spent nearly $800,000 on a 15-acre plot and main home and have an old $175,000 mortgage exempt from the new limit on mortgage-interest deductions. they plan to expand the home site by buying five adjoining acres for $200,000, borrowed against a first mortgage on the five acres and also collateralized by the 15 acres. their debt will be well under the $1 million limit -- on borrowing to acquire, build, or improve a home -- that qualifies for mortgage-interest deductions. as you can guess, the blandings want to deduct home-mortgage interest on the $200,000 loan. but, irs private ruling 8940061 notes, no rule or court case bears directly on the issue of adding land to a principal residence. so the irs has drawn a rationale from the sale of a home site split in two and sold in different years to the same buyer; a court let the seller in that old case treat this as the sale of one residence. thus, the irs says, the blandings' $200,000 loan is home-acquisition debt, and interest on it is fully deductible. earthquake victims facing imminent filing and payment deadlines will get extensions and penalty waivers like those provided for hugo's victims; irs notice 89108 has details. notice 89-107 offers added relief for hurricane-hit concerns that must file pension and benefit-plan returns. reports of payments to independent contractors for services must be filed by businesses, but don't bet that contractors' unreported income will be detected that way. the general accounting office estimates that 50% of irs audits don't spot companies that fail to file the reports. uh huh: a claim by peter testa of new york that a stranger paid him $500 to go into a bank and change $44,400 in small bills into large bills "is unconvincing," the tax court found. it held that testa is taxable on $44,400 of unreported income. why be a middleman for charitable gifts? a retiree asks. a retired electrical engineer we'll call ben works part-time as a consultant, but he doesn't want to earn so much that social security reduces his benefits. so he has arranged for a university foundation to set up a scholarship fund for undergraduate engineering students. he plans to tell clients to pay certain fees directly to the foundation instead of to him; he would omit those fees from income reported on his return. so he asked the irs if the plan would work. well, notes irs private ruling 8934014, "a fundamental principle" is that income must be taxed to whoever earns it. the rule goes back at least as far as a 1930 supreme court decision, robert willens of shearson lehman hutton says. if you assign your income to another, you still have controlled its disposition and enjoyed the fruits of your labor, even if indirectly. ben earns any fees sent directly to charity and is taxable on them, the irs says; of course, he also may take a charitable deduction for them. briefs: ways and means veteran gephardt (d., mo.) moves to the house budget committee; rep. cardin (d., md.) replaces him. . . . seattle's license fees for adult peep shows vary from those for other coin-operated amusements without serving a substantial government interest and are unconstitutional, the ninth-circuit appeals court holds for acorn investments inc.
blue-chip advertisers have plenty of complaints about the magazines they advertise in, ranging from inadequate consumer research to ad "clutter" and a seemingly unchecked proliferation of special interest magazines. criticism from such big advertisers as estee lauder inc., colgate-palmolive co. and seagram co. put a damper on the euphoria at the american magazine conference here. the conference opened monday with glowing reports about consumer magazines' growth in circulation and advertising revenue in the past year. "magazines are not providing us in-depth information on circulation," said edgar bronfman jr., president and chief operating officer of seagram, in a panel discussion. "how do readers feel about the magazine? how deeply do they read it? research doesn't tell us whether people actually do read the magazines they subscribe to. " reuben mark, chief executive of colgate-palmolive, said advertisers lack detailed demographic and geographic breakdowns of magazines' audiences. "we need research that convinces us that magazines are a real value in reader's lives, that readers are really involved." the critics also lambasted the magazine industry for something executives often are very proud of: the growth in magazine titles during the 1980s. leonard lauder, president and chief executive officer of estee lauder, said consumer magazines are suffering from what he called "niche-itis,"the increasing number of magazines that target the idosyncratic interests of readers. "niche-itis fragments our advertising dollars," said mr. lauder. "we are being over-magazined. we are constantly faced with deciding which partnerships {with magazines} we can keep." he added: "there's probably even a magazine for left-handed golfers . . . but the general interest magazine is something we all miss, and it should come back." mr. lauder also attacked what he sees as the wide imitation of elle, a fashion magazine published by diamandis communications inc., and criticized the practice of stacking ads at the front of magazines. "readers don't want to face all those ad pages at the front of a magazine," he said. magazine editors did not take the criticisms lying down. "we spend a fortune on research information," said steve burzon, publisher of meredith corp. 's metropolitan home. and tina brown, editor of conde nast publications inc. 's vanity fair, said advertisers are frequently asked to take advertising positions in the back of her magazine to relieve ad clutter. "but advertisers wouldn't think of it," she said. bernard leser, president of conde nast, added: "our research shows we sell more of our heavier issues . . . because readers believe they are getting more for what they pay for."
wall street securities giant salomon inc. posted a big, unexpected earnings gain in the third quarter, buoyed by its securities trading and investment banking activities. salomon said net income soared to $177 million, or $1.28 a share, from $65 million, or 38 cents a share, a year earlier. revenue more than doubled to $2.62 billion from $1.29 billion. a salomon spokesman said its stock, bond and foreign exchange trading, as well as its investment banking operations, were mostly responsible for the earnings jump. "the earnings were fine and above expectations," said michael w. blumstein, an analyst at first boston corp. nevertheless, salomon's stock fell $1.125 yesterday to close at $23.25 a share in new york stock exchange composite trading. "i suspect october wasn't as good as the third quarter, and they'll have difficulty matching the third quarter in the fourth quarter," mr. blumstein said. but some analysts say salomon has turned the corner. "i upgraded the firm to my buy list because i certainly see signs of improvement," says lawrence eckenfelder, an analyst at prudential-bache securities. "the market has been overly harsh to them." analysts say investors remain skittish toward salomon because of its volatile earnings. in the first quarter, salomon had a record loss of $28 million on revenue of $1.54 billion. but in the second quarter, salomon posted a record $253 million net on revenue of $2.33 billion.
for the real estate industry, a watchword for the 1990s will be buy, more than build. that's the word expected to be on the lips of the more than 3,000 developers, pension-fund advisers and real estate financiers slated to attend a four-day conference, beginning here today, sponsored by the urban land institute. the uli is a non-profit research and education group based in washington, d.c., with 14,000 members nationwide. with the market overbuilt, builders are finding limited opportunities and increased risks. developers and money managers are looking for bargains among the thousands of financially troubled properties around the country. real estate professionals now often bill themselves as "turnaround experts" and "workout specialists." conference attendees are expected to be buzzing about the workings of the recently formed resolution trust corp., a federal agency charged with disposing of an estimated $200 billion of real estate dumped in government hands by insolvent savings and loans. developers are also eyeing the real estate portfolios of major corporations. some plan to pursue foreign development ventures, mostly in europe. and other developers may shift from commercial to residential development in the u.s. "there aren't as many economically viable alternatives for real estate developers in this country as 10 years ago," says charles shaw, a chicago-based real estate developer. "so developers are saying they will look into distressed properties. they'll go into someone else's pasture as long as it's greener than the one they're in now." developers are also forming more joint ventures with pension funds and insurance companies that can finance big projects. the builders are more willing to give up some equity and rely on management and consulting fees to stay afloat in the soft market. "developers are teaming up with institutions often acting as project managers," says smedes york, uli president and president of york properties inc., of raleigh, n.c. "they are growing more pragmatic about their role." real estate firms are also using their alliances with financial institutions to amass acquisition funds. "why should you beat your brains out fighting the environmentalists, the neighborhood groups, dealing with traffic mitigation, sewers and fighting city hall, then try to convince a lender to lend you money in an overbuilt market when you can get pension fund money, buy a portfolio, sell off pieces off it and play your own game?" says jack rodman, managing partner of the los angeles office of kenneth leventhal inc. a national accounting firm. but experts say that when it comes to distressed properties, finding diamonds in the rough isn't easy. the level of interest in the rtc's properties has been greater than expected, and has come from larger companies than initially anticipated, says stan ross, leventhal's co-managing partner. and to succeed in the turnaround business, he says, developers may have to put in a lot of money and time. finding pension funds and other sources willing to invest is a high priority. quips david shulman, director of real estate research for salomon brothers inc.: "a theme of the urban land conference will be `take a pension fund manager to lunch. '"
david shaffer was named to the new post of executive vice president of the maxwell macmillan group of this communications giant. mr. shaffer takes primary responsibility for the electronic and technical-services group. he had been group vice president of the electronic-publishing group. also, sheldon aboff, formerly a vice president at maxwell, was named group vice president with responsibility for various electronic and publishing-group companies.
soichiro honda's picture now hangs with henry ford's in the u.s. automotive hall of fame, and the game-show "jeopardy" is soon to be sony-owned. but no matter how much japan gets under our skin, we'll still have mom and apple pie. on second thought, make that just mom. a japanese apple called the fuji is cropping up in orchards the way hondas did on u.s. roads. by 1995 it will be planted more often than any other apple tree, according to a recent survey of six apple-industry sages by washington state university horticulturist robert norton. some fruit visionaries say the fuji could someday tumble the red delicious from the top of america's apple heap. it certainly won't get there on looks. compared to the red delicious, the exemplar of apple pulchritude, the fuji is decidedly more dowdy -- generally smaller, less-perfectly shaped, greenish, with tinges of red. to hear most u.s. growers tell it, we'd still be in paradise if the serpent had proffered one to eve. but how sweet it is. it has more sugar "than any apple we've ever tested," says duane greene, a university of massachusetts pomologist, or apple scholar. it has a long shelf life and "doesn't fool the public," says grady auvil, an orondo, wash., grower who is planting fujis and spreading the good word about them. "it doesn't look nice on the outside while getting mealy inside." mr. auvil, razor sharp at 83, has picked and packed a zillion pecks of apples over the past 65 years. he is known as the father of the u.s.-grown granny smith, a radically different apple that the conventional wisdom once said would never catch on. it did, shaking the apple establishment to its roots. now, even more radical changes seem afoot as the grand old maverick of american apples plays the role of hiroshi appleseed. "the fuji is going to be no. 1 to replace the red delicious," he says. the delicious hegemony won't end anytime soon. new apple trees grow slowly, and the red delicious is almost as entrenched as mom. its roots are patriotic -- with the first trees appearing in 1872 in an orchard near peru, iowa, to be exact. for more than 50 years, it has been the apple of our eye. a good delicious can indeed be delicious. more than twice as many red delicious apples are grown as the golden variety, america's no. 2 apple. but the apple industry is ripe for change. "red delicious has been overplanted, and its prices have dropped below the cost of production," says washington state's mr. norton. the scare over alar, a growth regulator that makes apples redder and crunchier but may be carcinogenic, made consumers shy away from the delicious, though they were less affected than the mcintosh. the glut and consequent lower prices, combined with cancer fears, was a very serious blow to growers. "a lot of growers won't be around in a few years," says mr. norton, although they have stopped using alar. one may be william broderick, a sterling, mass., grower. "this is beautiful stuff," he says, looking ruefully at big boxes of just-picked red delicious next to his barn. "but i'm going to lose $50,000 to $60,000 on it. i'm going to have to get another job this year just to eat." besides rotten prices, he has been hit recently by hail, a bark-nibbling horde of mice, fungi and bugs. some 500 insects and 150 diseases wiggle, chew and romp through growers' nightmares, including maggots, mites, mildew, thrips, black rot and the flat-headed borer. even if a grower beats them back, his $2,000 rented bees might buzz off to the neighbors' orchards instead of pollinating his, mr. broderick says. though growers can't always keep the worm from the apple, they can protect themselves against the price vagaries of any one variety by diversifying -- into the recently imported gala, a sweet new zealand native; the esopus spitzenburg, reportedly thomas jefferson's favorite apple; disease-resistant kinds like the liberty. "i've ripped out a lot of delicious" and grafted the trees with many different shoots, says steve wood, a west lebanon, n.h., grower, tramping through his 100-acre poverty lane orchard on a crisp autumn day recently. "i've got 70 kinds of apples. here's a waltana," he exclaims, picking one off a tree. he bites it, scowls and throws it down. "it's a real dog." supermarkets are getting into the variety act, too. they still buy apples mainly for big, red good looks -- that's why so many taste like woodchucks' punching bags. but freshness counts more than it once did, and stores are expanding shelf space for unconventional, but tastier, and often pricier, apples. "rather than sell 39-cents-a-pound delicious, maybe we can sell 79-cents-a-pound fujis," says chuck tryon, perishables director for super valu inc., a minneapolis supermarket chain and food distributor. the fuji is a product of meticulous japanese pomological engineering, which fostered it 50 years ago at a government research orchard. japanese researchers have bred dozens of strains of fujis to hone its color, taste and shelf life. now the best of them age as gracefully as grannies, the industry's gold standard for storability. in the cornucopia of go-go apples, the fuji's track record stands out: during the past 15 years, it has gone from almost zilch to some 50% of japan's market. "the japanese apple market is very keyed to high quality," says david lane, a scientist at a canadian horticulture research center in summerland, british columbia, and so apples are more of a delicacy there than a big food commodity. the u.s. department of agriculture estimates that this year americans will eat about 40% more fresh apples per capita than the japanese. the fuji is still small potatoes in the u.s., sold mainly in fruit boutiques. but in california, says craig ito, a fuji-apple grower, "there's a fuji apple cult. once somebody eats one, they get hooked." mr. auvil, the washington grower, says that he could sell fujis to taiwan buyers at $40 a box if he had them. (taiwan already is a big importer of fujis from other places, he adds.) but his first crop won't be picked till next year. "i expect to see the demand exceed supply for fujis for the next 10 to 15 years," he adds. washington red delicious, by the way, are wholesaling for less than $10 a box these days. mr. auvil sees fujis, in part, as striking a blow against the perversion of u.s. apples by supermarkets. "when the chain stores took over, there was no longer a connection between grower and consumer. a guy is sitting up in an office deciding what you're going to eat." after all, until the 1950s even the red delicious was a firm, delectable morsel. then, as growers bred them more for looks, and to satisfy supermarket chains' demands of long-term storage, the red went into decline. now, those red applelike things stores sell in summer are fruitbowl lovely, but usually not good eating. they do deserve respect, however -- they are almost a year old, probably equal to about 106 in human years. the fuji, to be sure, has blemishes too. it ripens later than most apples, and growing it in u.s. areas with chilly autumns may be tricky. moreover, the frumpy fuji must compete with an increasingly dolledup delicious. mr. broderick, the massachusetts grower, says the "big boss" at a supermarket chain even rejected his red delicious recently because they weren't waxed and brushed for extra shine. and he hadn't used hormones, which many growers employ to elongate their delicious apples for greater eye appeal. still, mr. auvil points out, grannies became popular without big, red looks, so why not fujis? he sees a shift in american values -- at least regarding apples -- toward more emphasis on substance and less on glitz. "taste has finally come to the fore," he says. or, for that matter, the core.
the state attorney general's office filed suit against five new york brokerage firms, charging them with responsibility for much of a $200 million loss incurred by the state treasurer's office in 1987. the suit sets the firms' liability at more than $185 million. the firms are morgan stanley & co., salomon brothers inc., county natwest government securities inc., greenwich capital markets inc. and goldman, sachs & co. the firms have all said that west virginia's suit is without merit. on friday, the firms filed a suit against west virginia in new york state court asking for a declaratory judgment absolving them of liability. that suit is pending. the suits relate to a $200 million loss, disclosed in december, that was suffered by west virginia's consolidated investment pool. the pool invested idle cash for many state agencies and local governments. in its suit, the attorney general's office alleges that brokers encouraged members of the treasurer's office to engage in high-volume, high-risk transactions that benefited the brokers.
few people are aware that the federal government lends almost as much money as it borrows. from 1980 to 1988, while federal budget deficits totaled $1.41 trillion, the government issued $394 billion of new direct loans and an additional $756 billion of new primary loan guarantees. these figures omit secondary guarantees, deposit insurance, and the activities of government-sponsored enterprises (a huge concern in its own right, as detailed on this page may 3). federal credit programs date back to the new deal, and were meant to break even financially. since the 1950s, federal lending has experienced extraordinary growth in credit volume, subsidy rates, and policy applications, spurred on by the growth of government in general and budget gimmicks and deceptive management in particular. as we will see, many of these obligations don't show up as part of the federal deficit. but recent events indicate that federal credit is out of control. student loan defaults remain high at about 12%, and the program has been rocked by allegations of fraud and mismanagement. farmers home administration (fmha) loans have turned into de facto giveaway programs; losses over the next three years are expected to exceed $20 billion. defaults on veterans affairs loan guarantees have quadrupled in the past eight years. last month, the general accounting office reported that defaults in federal housing administration guarantees were five times as high as previously estimated, and that fha's equity fell to minus $2.9 billion. gao's findings are particularly troubling because the fha has about $300 billion in obligations outstanding and had previously been considered one of the most financially secure credit programs. scores of other credit programs, subsidizing agriculture, small business, exporters, defense, energy, transportation and others, are less visible but in no better shape. if the programs continue their present path, the potential government losses are staggering: the federal government holds $222 billion in direct loans outstanding and backs an additional $550 billion in primary guarantees. (secondary guarantees of pools of fha- and va-backed loans by the agency known as ginnie mae currently exceed $330 billion.) although external events have contributed to the morass, the principal causes of the current crisis are internal and generic to all programs. to reduce the risks while still retaining the legitimate benefits these programs can provide, credit policy must: 1. use credit to improve the operation of capital markets, not to provide subsidies. there is a fundamental conflict between providing a subsidy and maintaining the integrity of a credit program. if the program is meant to provide a subsidy, collecting the debt defeats the original goal. thus, subsidized loans tend to turn into giveaway programs, with increasing subsidy and default rates over time. to avoid this problem, government should issue credit only if it intends to use every legal method to collect. in contrast, credit programs can be appropriate tools to improve the operation of capital markets. for example, legal restrictions on interstate banking once inhibited the supply of credit to the agricultural sector. farm lending was enacted to correct this problem by providing a reliable flow of lendable funds. however, this in no way justifies the huge government subsidies and losses on such loans. credit policy should separate these two competing objectives and eliminate aspects that provide the subsidy. for example, student loans currently attempt to subsidize college attendance and mitigate problems created by the fact that students' future earnings are not accepted as collateral. the program provides highly subsidized loans to any student whose family earns less than a particular amount. high default rates, a low interest rate, and government coverage of all interest costs while the student is in school make program costs extremely high. families that do not need the loan can make money simply by putting the loan in the bank and paying it back when the student graduates. in contrast, a student loan program that was meant solely to correct capital-market imperfections would allow loans for any student, regardless of family income, at market or near-market rates. while the student was in school, interest costs would either be paid by the student or added to the loan balance. this program, combined with cash grants to needy students, would reduce program costs and much more effectively target the intended beneficiaries. 2. provide better incentives. given the structure of most credit programs, it is surprising that default rates are not even higher. guarantee rates are typically 100%, giving lenders little reason to screen customers carefully. reducing those rates moderately (say, to 75%) would still provide substantial assistance to borrowers. but it would also encourage lenders to choose more creditworthy customers, and go a long way toward reducing defaults. for example, the small business administration has had reasonable success in reducing both guarantee rates and default rates in its preferred lenders' program. borrowers' incentives are equally skewed. since the government has a dismal record of collecting bad debts, the costs to the borrower of defaulting are usually low. in addition, it is often possible to obtain a new government loan even if existing debts are not paid off. simple policy prescriptions in this case would be to improve debt collection (taking the gloves off contracted collection agencies) and to deny new credit to defaulters. these provisions would be difficult to enforce for a program intended to provide a subsidy, but would be reasonable and effective devices for programs that attempt to offset market imperfections. 3. record the true costs of credit programs in the federal budget. since the budget measures cash flow, a new $1 direct loan is treated as a $1 expenditure, even though at least part of the loan will be paid back. loan guarantees don't appear at all until the borrower defaults, so new guarantees do not raise the deficit, even though they create future liabilities for the government. by converting an expenditure or loan to a guarantee, the government can ensure the same flow of resources and reduce the current deficit. predictably, guarantees outstanding have risen by $130 billion since 1985, while direct loans outstanding have fallen by $30 billion. the true budgetary cost of a credit subsidy is the discounted value of the net costs to government. this figure could be estimated using techniques employed by private lenders to forecast losses, or determined by selling loans to private owners (without federal guarantees). neither technique is perfect, but both are better than the current system, which misstates the costs of new credit programs by amounts that vary substantially and average about $20 billion annually, according to the congressional budget office. a budget that reflected the real costs of lending would eliminate incentives to convert spending or lending programs to guarantees and would let taxpayers know what congress is committing them to. 4. impose standard accounting and administrative practices. creative accounting is a hallmark of federal credit. many agencies roll over their debt, paying off delinquent loans by issuing new loans, or converting defaulted loan guarantees into direct loans. in any case, they avoid having to write off the loans. some agencies simply keep bad loans on the books; as late as 1987, the export-import bank held in its portfolio at face value loans made to cuba in the 1950s. more seriously, fmha has carried several billion dollars of defaulted loans at face value. until gao's recent audit, fha books had not been subject to a complete external audit in 15 years. the administration of federal credit should closely parallel private lending practices, including the development of a loan loss reserve and regular outside audits. establishing these practices would permit earlier identification of emerging financial crises, provide better information for loan sales and budgeting decisions, and reduce fraud. government lending was not intended to be a way to obfuscate spending figures, hide fraudulent activity, or provide large subsidies. the reforms described above would provide a more limited, but clearer, safer and ultimately more useful role for government as a lender. without such reforms, credit programs will continue to be a large-scale, high-risk proposition for taxpayers. mr. gale is an assistant professor of economics at ucla.
malcolm s. todt was named vice president and senior officer in charge of equipment leasing to municipalities, a new effort of this bond insurer. mr. todt had been vice president and treasurer of insilco corp.
president bush is considering casting a line-item veto as a test to determine whether the courts will rule that he has such authority. mr. bush has long campaigned for passage of a bill or a constitutional amendment that would explicitly give him a line-item veto, which would enable him to kill individual items in a big spending bill without having to kill the entire bill. he has argued that such presidential power is necessary to rein in congressional spending. but some analysts, particularly conservative legal scholars, have urged mr. bush not to wait for explicit authorization but simply to assert that the constitution already implicitly gives him the power to exercise a line-item veto. such an assertion most likely would bring about a court challenge from congress that would clarify whether a president already has such power. white house spokesman marlin fitzwater, confirming comments made this week by vice president dan quayle, said mr. bush is "interested" in finding a suitable test case. but he also said that exercising a test line-item veto isn't a "top initiative" on the president's agenda because he faces more-pressing budget issues at the moment.
harris ravine, executive vice president of customer satisfaction, was named executive vice president, finance and administration of this maker of data storage equipment. mr. ravine succeeds william r. mansfield jr., who will remain with the company until the end of the year to support the transition and to complete important projects.
the bush administration said it is submitting a "comprehensive" proposal for overhauling agricultural trade that could help break an impasse in the current round of multilateral trade negotiations. the proposal reiterates the u.s. desire to scrap or reduce a host of trade-distorting subsidies on farm products. but it would allow considerable flexibility in determining how and when these goals would be achieved. the u.s. plan also would ease the transition to freer agriculture trade by allowing some countries to convert non-tariff barriers into tariffs that, together with existing tariffs, then would be phased out over 10 years. trade representative carla hills, who along with agriculture secretary clayton yeutter unveiled the proposal, said she is confident it will gain considerable support from the u.s.'s trading partners. mr. yeutter, seeking to allay european objections to an earlier u.s. plan that called for eliminating all farm-trade barriers by the year 2000, said the new u.s. proposal wouldn't "put farmers out of business" but would only encourage them to "grow what the markets desire instead of what the government wants." the u.s. is submitting the proposal today in geneva, hoping that the initiative will spur members of the general agreement on tariffs and trade to reach agreement on new trade rules before their current negotiating round concludes in december 1990. another u.s. proposal filed monday urges more "fair play" in services trade, including predictable and clear rules and equality in the treatment of foreign and domestic service companies. unlike the earlier u.s. farm-trade proposal which struck european countries as too extreme, the latest plan would provide some room for maneuver. for instance, the new u.s. package makes clear there would be a transition period during which gatt members could use a combination of tariffs and quotas to cushion their farmers from foreign competition. it also says countries could temporarily raise tariffs on certain products if they experience an unusually heavy volume of imports. instead of proposing a complete elimination of farm subsidies, as the earlier u.s. proposal did, the new package calls for the elimination of only the most tradedistorting ones. less objectionable ones would be subject only to some restraints, and others with a "relatively minor trade impact" would be allowed to continue under certain conditions. the new u.s. plan also would establish procedures to prevent countries from using health and sanitation rules to impede trade arbitrarily. the goal would be to resolve disputes such as one prompted by the european community's current attempt to bar imports of beef from hormone-treated u.s. cattle. the u.s. contends that the rules aren't justified on health grounds. to encourage more competition among exporting countries, the u.s. is proposing that export subsidies, including tax incentives for exporters, be phased out in five years.
procter & gamble co., helped by a gain from a lawsuit settlement and continued growth overseas, posted a 38% rise in fiscal first-quarter net income. net for the quarter ended sept. 30 climbed to $551 million, or $1.66 a share, from $400 million, or $1.18 a share, a year earlier. per-share figures have been adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split effective oct. 20. sales increased 6% to $5.58 billion from $5.27 billion. earnings at the consumer-products giant were boosted by a gain of $125 million, or about 25 cents a share, stemming from last month's settlement of litigation with three of p&g's competitors over patents on p&g's duncan hines cookies. excluding the gain, p&g's earnings were close to analysts' predictions of about $1.40 a share for the quarter. wall street had expected a modest rise in the company's domestic sales and earnings, and more substantial increases in overseas results. one factor helping sales and earnings was a 3% price rise for most p&g products, except coffee, analysts said. unit volume, or amount of products shipped, rose about 11% in the international segment, with p&g continuing to win market share in japan's diaper and detergent markets. jay freedman, analyst with kidder, peabody & co., said p&g's always sanitary napkin, sold under the whisper name in japan, has firmly established itself as a leading brand. he figures p&g will expand its personal-care product line in japan to "continue that momentum." p&g's u.s. shipments were up just 1%, partly because the company decided to shift more promotions and sales for health and beauty products to the fiscal second quarter. hugh zurkuhlen, analyst with salomon bros., predicts the shift will mean p&g's sales growth in the second quarter will be "in the double digits." also slowing growth in the u.s. were lackluster results for p&g's cooking oils, which had a strong year-earlier first quarter. last year's drought in the midwest prompted retailers to stock up on oils ahead of anticipated price increases, boosting sales for crisco and puritan oils, analysts said. for fiscal 1990, analysts expect p&g's sales to continue to grow, with earnings climbing between 15% and 20%. lynne hyman, vice president of equity research for first boston corp., expects p&g to post net of about $4.20 a share, on a post-split basis. "but i'm recognizing there's a good chance they'll do a bit better than that," she says. in fiscal 1989, p&g earned $3.56 a share, adjusted for the stock split. one big factor affecting the fiscal second half will be the new stewardship of edwin l. artzt, who becomes chairman and chief executive officer in january. because of his remarkable success turning around p&g's international operations, analysts have high hopes for his tenure. "if he does to the domestic operations what he did internationally," says mr. zurkuhlen, "this company will earn $6 or $7 a share in a few years."
the voting rights act of 1965 was enacted to keep the promise of the fifteenth amendment and enable southern blacks to go to the polls, unhindered by literacy tests and other exclusionary devices. twenty-five years later, the voting rights act has been transformed by the courts and the justice department into a program of racial gerrymandering designed to increase the number of blacks and other minorities -- hispanics, asians and native americans -- holding elective office. in the 1980s, the justice department and lower federal courts that enforce the voting rights act have required state legislatures and municipal governments to create the maximum number of "safe" minority election districts -- districts where minorities form between 65% and 80% of the voting population. the program has even been called upon to create "safe" white electoral districts in municipalities where whites are the minority. although section 2 of the act expressly disclaims requiring that minorities win a proportional share of elective offices, few municipal and state government plans achieve preclearance by the justice department or survive the scrutiny of the lower federal courts unless they carve out as many solidly minority districts as possible. the new goal of the voting rights act -- more minorities in political office -- is laudable. for the political process to work, all citizens, regardless of race, must feel represented. one essential indicator that they are is that members of minority groups get elected to public office with reasonable frequency. as is, blacks constitute 12% of the population, but fewer than 2% of elected leaders. but racial gerrymandering is not the best way to accomplish that essential goal. it is a quick fix for a complex problem. far from promoting a commonality of interests among black, white, hispanic and other minority voters, drawing the district lines according to race suggests that race is the voter's and the candidate's most important trait. such a policy implies that only a black politician can speak for a black person, and that only a white politician can govern on behalf of a white one. examples of the divisive effects of racial gerrymandering can be seen in two cities -- new york and birmingham, ala. when they reapportion their districts after the 1990 census, every other municipality and state in the country will face this issue. new york city: racial gerrymandering has been a familiar policy in new york city since 1970, when congress first amended the voting rights act to expand its reach beyond the southern states. in 1972, the justice department required that the electoral map in the borough of brooklyn be redrawn to concentrate black and hispanic votes, despite protests that the new electoral boundaries would split a neighborhood of hasidic jews into two different districts. this year, a commission appointed by the mayor to revise new york's system of government completed a new charter, expanding the city council to 51 from 35 members. sometime in 1991, as soon as the 1990 census becomes available, a redistricting panel will redraw the city council district lines. the charter revision commission has made it clear that in response to the expectations of the justice department and the commission's own commitment to enhancing minority political leadership, the new district lines will be drawn to maximize the number of solidly minority districts. blacks and hispanics currently make up 38% of the city's population and hold only 25% of the seats on the council. several of the city's black leaders, including democratic mayoral nominee david dinkins, have spoken out for racial gerrymandering to accord blacks and hispanics "the fullest opportunity for representation." in this connection, it is important to note that several members of new york's sitting city council represent heterogeneous districts that bring together sizable black, hispanic, and non-hispanic white populations -- carolyn maloney's 8th district in northern manhattan and the south bronx and susan alter's 25th district in brooklyn, for example. to win their seats on the council, these political leaders have had to listen to all the voices in their district and devise public policies that would benefit all. often they have found that the relevant issue is not race, but rather housing, crime prevention or education. birmingham, ala.: the unusual situation in birmingham vividly illustrates the divisive consequences of carving out safe districts for racial minorities. in birmingham, which is 57% black, whites are the minority. insisting that they are protected by the voting rights act, a group of whites brought a federal suit in 1987 to demand that the city abandon at-large voting for the nine member city council and create nine electoral districts, including four safe white districts. the white group argued that whites were not fully and fairly represented, because in city-wide elections only black candidates or white candidates who catered to "black interests" could win. no federal court has ruled that the voting rights act protects a white minority, but in june the justice department approved a districting plan for birmingham that carves out three white-majority districts and six black-majority districts. richard arrington, birmingham's black mayor, lamented the consequences. "in the past, people who had to run for office had to moderate their views because they couldn't afford to offend blacks or whites," he said. "now you go to districts, you're likely to get candidates whose views are more extreme, white and black, on racial issues." two hundred years ago, critics of the new united states constitution warned that the electoral districts for congress were too large and encompassed too many different economic interests. a small farmer and a seaport merchant could not be represented by the same spokesman, they said. but james madison refuted that argument in one of the most celebrated political treatises ever written, no. 10 of the federalist papers. madison explained that a representative's duty was to speak not for the narrow interests of one group but instead for the common good. large, heterogeneous election districts would encourage good government, said madison, because a representative would be compelled to serve the interests of all his constituents and be servile to none. madison's noble and unifying vision of the representative still can guide us. as long as we believe that all americans, of every race and ethnic background, have common interests and can live together cooperatively, our political map should reflect our belief. racial gerrymandering -- creating separate black and white districts -- says that we have discarded that belief in our ability to live together and govern ourselves as one people. ms. mccaughey is a constitutional scholar at the center for the study of the presidency in new york.
the justice department has distributed these new guidelines for u.s. attorneys prosecuting rico cases. a related editorial appears today. under {rico}, the government may seek a temporary restraining order (tro) upon the filing of a rico indictment, in order to preserve all forfeitable assets until the trial is completed and judgment entered. such orders can have a wide-ranging impact on third parties who do business with the defendants, including clients, vendors, banks, investors, creditors, dependents, and others. some highly publicized cases involving rico tros have been the subject of considerable criticism in the press, because of a perception that pre-trial freezing of assets is tantamount to a seizure of property without due process. in order to ensure that the rights of all interested parties are protected, the criminal division has instituted the following requirements to control the use of tros in rico prosecutions. (it should be noted that these requirements are in addition to any other existing requirements, such as review by the asset forfeiture office.): 1. as part of the approval process for rico prosecutions, the prosecutor must submit any proposed forfeiture tro for review by the organized crime and racketeering section. the prosecutor must show that less-intrusive remedies (such as bonds) are not likely to preserve the assets for forfeiture in the event of a conviction. 2. in seeking approval of a tro, the prosecutor must articulate any anticipated impact that forfeiture and the tro would have on innocent third parties, balanced against the government's need to preserve the assets. 3. in deciding whether forfeiture (and, hence, a tro) is appropriate, the section will consider the nature and severity of the offense; the government's policy is not to seek the fullest forfeiture permissible under the law where that forfeiture would be disproportionate to the defendant's crime. 4. when a rico tro is being sought, the prosecutor is required, at the earliest appropriate time, to state publicly that the government's request for a tro, and eventual forfeiture, is made in full recognition of the rights of third parties -- that is, in requesting the tro, the government will not seek to disrupt the normal, legitimate business activities of the defendant; will not seek through use of the relation-back doctrine to take from third parties assets legitimately transferred to them; will not seek to vitiate legitimate business transactions occurring between the defendant and third parties; and will, in all other respects, assist the court in ensuring that the rights of third parties are protected, through proceeding under {rico} and otherwise. the division expects that the prosecutor will announce these principles either at the time the indictment is returned or, at the latest, at the first proceeding before the court concerning the tro.
sales of north american-built cars and trucks plunged 20.5% in mid-october from a year earlier, as domestic manufacturers paid the price for heavy incentives earlier this year. "people are waiting for {new} factory giveaways," said ben kaye, sales manager of bob brest auto world in lynn, mass., whose sales are slow. this trend appears to be especially true at general motors corp., which used both dealer and consumer incentives to ignite sales in august and september. since then, deliveries have slumped. gm's car sales dropped 24.8% in mid-october to 69,980, while truck sales fell 26% to 37,860. gm also had dismal results in the first 10 days of the month, while other auto makers reported mixed results. all of the big three suffered in the just-ended period, however, with sales of all domestically made cars, including those built at japanese-managed plants, falling 19% to 158,863 from a year earlier. the seasonal adjusted annual selling rate was six million vehicles, a small improvement from the 5.8 million rate of early october, but a big drop from the 7.1 million rate a year ago. sales of domestically made trucks also continued to be sluggish in mid-october, dropping 22.8% to 94,543 from a year ago. the big three auto makers already have slashed fourth-quarter production plans 10.4% below year-ago levels, but that may not be enough to prevent inventories from ballooning if sales don't improve. industry analyst john h. qualls, a vice president with hill & knowlton in st. louis, forecasts that domestic auto makers will have a 93-day supply of cars at the end of the year, even if car sales improve to a 6.5 million vehicle rate for the quarter. ford motor co. reported a 21.2% drop in sales of domestic-made cars to 46,995 and a 24.2% drop in domestic trucks to 31,143. the sales are being dragged down by a glut of 1989 vehicles, said joel pitcoff, a ford analyst. the earlier use of incentives depleted the market of "scavengers" for bargain-basement 1989 cars, he said. town & country ford in charlotte, n.c., still needs to move about 850 1989 cars and trucks. business had been fairly strong until hurricane hugo hit the area, but has been down since. chrysler corp. also hit the rocks in mid-october. the no. 3 u.s. auto maker had a 23.7% plunge in car sales to 22,336 and a 17.5% drop in truck sales to 22,925, which include its minivans and jeeps. honda motor co., which continues to have short supplies of domestically made accords, saw its sales of north american-built cars fall 14.1% to 8,355. but sales of domestic cars and trucks at nissan motor corp. rose 26.1% to 5,651. a nissan spokesman attributed the increase to the use of incentives this year and not a year ago and to higher fleet sales. toyota motor corp., which opened a plant in georgetown, ky., last year, saw sales triple to 6,256 vehicles. > a-totals include only vehicle sales reported in the period. c-domestic car d-percent change greater than 999%. x-there were 9 selling days in the most recent period and 9 a year earlier. percentage differences based on daily sales rate rather than sales volume.
short interest in nasdaq over-the-counter stocks rose 6% as of mid-october, its biggest jump since 6.3% last april. the most recent otc short interest statistics were compiled oct. 13, the day the nasdaq composite index slid 3% and the new york stock exchange tumbled 7%. the coincidence might lead to the conclusion that short-sellers bet heavily on that day that otc stocks would decline further. as it happens, the nasdaq composite did continue to fall for two days after the initial plunge. however, the short interest figures reported by brokerage and securities clearing firms to the national association of securities dealers include only those trades completed, or settled, by oct. 13, rather than trades that occurred on that day, according to gene finn, chief economist for the nasd. generally, it takes five business days to transfer stock and to take the other steps necessary to settle a trade. the total short interest in nasdaq stocks as of mid-october was 237.1 million shares, up from 223.7 million in september but well below the record level of 279 million shares established in july 1987. the sharp rise in otc short interest compares with the 4.2% decline in short interest on the new york stock exchange and the 3% rise on the american stock exchange during the september-october period. generally, a short seller expects a fall in a stock's price and aims to profit by selling borrowed shares that are to be replaced later; the short seller hopes the replacement shares bought later will cost less than those that were sold. short interest, which represents the number of shares borrowed and sold, but not yet replaced, can be a bad-expectations barometer for many stocks. among 2,412 of the largest otc issues, short interest rose to 196.8 million shares, from 185.7 million in 2,379 stocks in september. big stocks with large short interest gains as of oct. 13 included first executive, intel, campeau and lin broadcasting. short interest in first executive, an insurance issue, rose 55% to 3.8 million. intel's short interest jumped 42%, while campeau's increased 62%. intel makes semiconductors and campeau operates department-store chains and is strained for cash. meritor savings again had the dubious honor of being the otc stock with the biggest short interest position on nasdaq. meritor has headed the list since may. first executive and troubled valley national corp. of arizona were next in line. short selling isn't necessarily bad for the overall market. shorted shares must eventually be replaced through buying. in addition, changes in short interest in some stocks may be caused by arbitrage. for example, an investor may seek to profit during some takeover situations by buying stock in one company involved and shorting the stock of the other. two big stocks involved in takeover activity saw their short interest surge. short interest in the american depositary receipts of jaguar, the target of both ford motor and general motors, more than doubled. nasdaq stocks that showed a drop in short interest included adobe systems, class a shares of tele-communications and takeover targets lyphomed and jerrico. the nasd, which operates the nasdaq computer system on which 5,200 otc issues trade, compiles short interest data in two categories: the approximately two-thirds, and generally biggest, nasdaq stocks that trade on the national market system; and the one-third, and generally smaller, nasdaq stocks that aren't a part of the system. short interest in 1,327 non-nms securities totaled 40.3 million shares, compared with almost 38 million shares in 1,310 issues in september. the october short interest represents 1.04 days of average daily trading volume in the smaller stocks in the system for the reporting period, compared with 0.94 day a month ago. among bigger otc stocks, the figures represent 2.05 days of average daily volume, compared with 2.14 days in september. the adjacent tables show the issues in which a short interest position of at least 50,000 shares existed as of oct. 13 or in which there was a short position change of at least 25,000 shares since sept. 15 (see accompanying tables -- wsj oct. 25, 1989).
from the sept. 30-oct. 4 issue of the economist: what defeated general aoun was not only the weight of the syrian army. the weight of lebanon's history was also against him; and it is a history israel is in danger of repeating. like lebanon, and however unfairly, israel is regarded by the arab world as a colonial aberration. its best hope of acceptance by its neighbours lies in reaching a settlement with the palestinians. like lebanon, israel is being remade by demography. in greater israel more than half the children under six are muslims. within 25 years jews will probably be the minority. yet israel will neither share power with all these arabs nor, says its present prime minister, redraw its borders closer to its pre-1967 jewish heartland. by not choosing one of these options, israelis will condemn themselves, as the maronites did, to perpetual war with the muslims in their midst, and so to the internal erosion of their state. unlike the maronites, israel's jews will not let themselves become the weakest force in a system of private armies; jerusalem will become belfast before it becomes beirut. but that is not much of a consolation to draw from the failure of general aoun.
probably the most clear-cut soviet violation, for example, is the krasnoyarsk radar. -- "arms control reality," nov. 20, 1984, the first of some 20 journal editorials saying that krasnoyarsk violated the abm treaty. -- "whether the installation is for early warning or space track, it clearly is not deployed," the lawmakers said. "thus we judge it to be not a violation of the abm treaty at this time." the delegation included a reporter from the new york times, aides to sen. edward m. kennedy and rep. les aucoin, and natural resources defense council staff members. -- the washington post, sept. 9, 1987. -- the u.s.s.r. has taken unprecedented unilateral measures of openness, by giving american representatives a possibility to inspect the building site of the krasnoyarsk radar as well as radar vans in the areas of gomel and moscow, so as to see for themselves that there are no violations of the abm treaty of 1972 on the part of the soviet union. -- letter from eduard shevardnadze to u.n. secretary-general perez de cuellar, reported in tass, june 10, 1988. -- the construction of this station equal in size to the egyptian pyramids constituted, i say it directly, a clear violation of abm. -- eduard shevardnadze, oct. 23, 1989. we're happy, we guess, to receive confirmation of the krasnoyarsk violation from the soviets, five years after we started writing about it. perhaps even the american apologists will now accede. without question, something intriguing is going on in the policy chambers of the politburo. as it bids for new agreements, new loans and indeed admission to the civilized world, the soviet government has recognized it has a credibility problem. so after 70 years, it is confessing the obvious, hoping to be believed about other things. it's not enough. if the soviets want to be believed, they need to start telling the truth about more than the totally obvious. our own test of "glasnost's" authenticity would be a soviet decision to open itself to a complete international examination of one of the most troubling mysteries in u.s.-soviet relations -- the reported 1979 anthrax outbreak at a soviet military facility in sverdlovsk. the u.s. government has never waivered in its assessment of this incident as an accident at a biological weapons facility there, and hence a violation of the 1972 biological weapons convention. the pentagon's recently issued "soviet military power," though in general adopting a softer line, repeated the sverdlovsk assessment. it also was detailed in congressional testimony this past february: an explosion at the microbiology and virology institute in sverdlovsk released anthrax germs that caused a significant number of deaths. since mr. shevardnadze did not address this topic before the supreme soviet, the soviet union's official position remains that the anthrax deaths were caused by tainted meat. we doubt this claim just as we doubted mr. shevardnadze's assurance last year that krasnoyarsk didn't violate the abm treaty. and just as we did not believe the tendentious claims of the congressmen and arms-control advocates who visited krasnoyarsk, we are in no way persuaded by the assent to the tainted-meat theory by a u.s. team of scientists who met with soviet counterparts in washington last year. the soviets' explanation is that the anthrax came from one lot of animal feed made from the bones of cattle that grazed on soil that was naturally infected with anthrax spores. harvard's matthew meselson -- who we read has sold something called the "scientific community" on the notion that "yellow rain" attacks on the laotian hmong were in fact the result of fecal showers by giant bees -- found the soviet anthrax scenario "completely plausible." we don't believe it. and we certainly do not believe that mr. gorbachev or any of his emissaries yet deserve to have the west take their word for it. sverdlovsk is a large gray cloud over glasnost and indeed over the legitimacy of the arms-control process itself. the u.s. government's sverdlovsk complaint, as with krasnoyarsk, is no mere political posturing. biological weapons violations have figured little in political debate, and indeed have not been pressed vigorously enough by the u.s. government. but the stated u.s. position is detailed and specific, and the prospect of biological warfare is profoundly chilling. the soviets should be willing to set in motion a process that would allow them to acknowledge that sverdlovsk violated the 1972 agreement or, alternatively, that would give u.s. specialists reasonable confidence that this was a wholly civilian accident. until that happens, glasnost cannot begin to deserve the kind of credibility mr. shevardnadze was bidding for with his confessions on monday.
manville corp. said it offered to buy $500 million of its convertible preferred stock from the manville personal injury settlement trust in a move that would improve the trust's liquidity and reduce the potential number of manville shares outstanding. manville said it made the offer within the past several weeks as part of an effort to improve shareholder value. it said it would purchase the stock at market price. manville and a spokeswoman for the trust said that the two are discussing the proposal but a decision hasn't been made. "we are considering that offer along with all other alternatives," the trust spokeswoman said. "we need to look at how to maximize our cash flow to pay our beneficiaries." the trust, created as part of manville's bankruptcy-law reorganization to compensate victims of asbestos-related diseases, owns 7.2 million of the series a convertible preferred shares, which are each convertible into 10 manville common shares. the trust also owns half of manville's 48 million common shares outstanding. based on manville's closing price yesterday of $9.25 a share, manville's offer would purchase about 5.4 million of its preferred shares, or about 75% of the trust's preferred stock holding. in addition to the stock and 20% of manville's profits beginning in 1992, the trust is supposed to receive $2.5 billion over its 27-year life. but it initially was funded with about $765 million and may soon face a cash crunch. as of june 30, it had settled about 15,000 of 81,000 claims filed and its unpaid claims totaled $136 million, a large portion of its $268 million in cash and marketable securities. since most of its assets are tied to manville, a forest and building products concern, the trust might also want to diversify its holdings. as part of its offer, manville said it requested changes in some covenants between it and the trust to allow manville to "reflect a more typical corporate ownership and financial structure." a manville spokesman wouldn't elaborate on the proposed changes. but he said they are "to a large degree, housekeeping," although some may generate some disagreement. manville said the shares issued to the trust were intended to be sold, as needed, and that manville has the right of first refusal to buy those shares.
northeast utilities raised its bid for public service co. of new hampshire, which is operating under bankruptcy code protection, to $2.25 billion from $1.85 billion. northeast's raised bid, which was supported by ps of new hampshire's official shareholder committee, is a prelude to what is expected to be a round of higher bids by the other groups trying to acquire the company, the largest utility in new hampshire. the $2.25 billion value claimed by northeast, based in hartford, conn., is the highest yet given to a bid. some of the three other bidding groups are expected to increase their offers tomorrow, a date set for revised offers by a bankruptcy court judge. a hearing is set for nov. 15, but participants don't expect a resolution until july 1990. under the new northeast utilities plan, it would pay $1.65 billion in cash to creditors and assume $100 million in pollution control bonds. secured creditors would recover both principal and interest, while unsecured creditors would receive only principal and interest accrued before ps of new hampshire filed for bankruptcy code protection in january the biggest change in northeast's offer was in improvements made for equity holders who had been given short shrift previously. assuming full operation of the seabrook nuclear power plant, which is completed but isn't yet operating, equity holders would receive up to $500 million in cash, preferred stock and new 10-year seabrook bonds. northeast's previous offer had proposed that equity holders receive just $165 million. in addition, northeast promised the state of new hampshire that rate increases would be limited to 5.5% annually for seven years. its previous proposal had conditioned rate limits on seabrook operations and other contingencies. wilbur ross, financial adviser to the equity holders said, "given the state's strong bargaining position . . . we believe the nu plan provides the best recovery available" to ps of new hampshire's equity holders. officials of ps of new hampshire couldn't be reached for comment. the company has filed an internal reorganization plan it valued at $2.2 billion that would require 5.5% rate increases. that plan would leave existing preferred shareholders with at least a 41% stake and give common shareholders as little as 13%. new england electric system, westborough, mass., has proposed buying the company for $2 billion as part of a plan that would require rate increases of only 4.8% annually for seven years. the state of new hampshire has favored that plan. the other bidder is united illuminating co., new haven, conn., with a bid valued at $2.2 billion and and a proposal for seven years of 5.5% rate increases.
the house approved a short-term spending bill to keep the government operating through nov. 15 and provide $2.85 billion in emergency funds to assist in the recovery from hurricane hugo and the california earthquake. the 321-99 roll call vote reflected broad support for the disaster assistance, but the cost to the treasury is sure to aggravate budget pressures this year and next under the gramm-rudman deficit reduction law. by a lopsided 401-18 margin, the chamber rejected an effort to waive gramm-rudman for purposes of addressing the two disasters, and budget analysts estimate the increased appropriations will widen the fiscal 1990 deficit by at least $1.44 billion unless offsetting spending cuts or new revenues are found by congress. the budget impact will be greater still in fiscal 1991, and the issue forced a confrontation between the appropriations committee leadership and budget committee chairman leon panetta, whose california district was at the center of the earthquake last week. going to the well of the chamber, mr. panetta demanded the costs be fully counted. his prominent role put him in the awkward position of challenging the very committee members on whom his state will be most dependent in the months ahead. "we do not come to this house asking for any handout," said the california democrat. "we do not intend to hide these costs from the american people." the $2.85 billion package incorporates $500 million for low-interest disaster loans, $1 billion in highway construction funds, and $1.35 billion divided between general emergency assistance and a reserve to be available to president bush to meet unanticipated costs from the two disasters. the funds are in addition to $1.1 billion appropriated last month to assist in the recovery from hugo, bringing the total for the two disasters to nearly $4 billion in unanticipated spending. because of the vagaries of gramm-rudman, the immediate impact is relatively small. but the appropriations set in motion spending that adds to an already grim budget picture for fiscal 1991. within the appropriations process, the situation is even more difficult since the costs will be counted against the share of funds to be allocated to those subcommittees that recently have had the greatest difficulty in staying within the budget. the underlying bill approved yesterday is required to keep the government operating past midnight tonight, and this urgency has contributed to the speed -- and, critics say, mistakes -- that have accompanied the package of disaster assistance. the hastily drafted measure could hurt california by requiring it to put up more matching funds for emergency highway assistance than otherwise would be required. and the state's delegation is fearful that the new funding will be counted against a separate $185 million in federal highway funds it would expect to receive under its normal allocation this year. also, the high price of san francisco real estate puts the state at odds with federal regulations more attuned to the national average. for example, disaster loans, which will go to small businesses and homeowners, offer credit as low as 4% in some cases. but the san francisco delegation finds itself asking that the cap per household be lifted to $500,000 from $100,000 to assist the hard hit but often wealthy marina district. the senate is expected to make some modifications today, but both the white house and congress appear most anxious to speed final approval before tonight's deadline. administration pressure discourages any effort to add to total funding, and the senate changes are expected to be largely technical -- dealing with highway aid and lifting the ceiling on total small business administration loans to $1.8 billion to accommodate the increased activity expected. yesterday's floor action came as a house-senate conference approved a nearly $8.5 billion fiscal 1990 military construction bill, representing a 5% reduction from last year and making severe cuts from pentagon requests for installations abroad. an estimated $25.8 million is allocated to continue work in oman. but all funding is cut for the philippines, and projects in south korea are cut to $13.6 million, or less than a sixth of the administration's request. closer to home, the negotiators were more generous. an estimated $38.9 million was set aside for military installations in the home state of north carolina rep. w.g. hefner, the house chairman. and $70.2 million would go to projects in tennessee represented by his senate counterpart and fellow democrat, sen. james sasser. texas and california are traditionally powerful within the conference, but equally striking is the dominance of alaska, pennsylvania and west virginia because of their power elsewhere in the appropriations process. senate appropriations committee chairman robert byrd (d., w.va.) even added report language listing $49.4 million in projects he wants in the budget next year. no individual illustrated this mix of power more yesterday than sen. daniel inouye (d., hawaii), who chairs the senate defense subcommittee. in the final trading, the house was insistent on setting aside $500 million to carry out base closings ordered to begin in fiscal 1990. but it gave ground to mr. inouye on a number of projects, ranging from a $11 million parking garage here, to a land transfer in hawaii, to a provision to assist the makwah indian tribe in washington state. the tribe is one of the poorest in the pacific northwest. mr. inouye, who chairs the select committee on indian affairs, used his power to move $400,000 from the air force to the bureau of indian affairs to assist in renovating a decommissoned base to accommodate a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center. meanwhile, house-senate negotiators have tentatively agreed on a $3.18 billion anti-drug and anti-crime intitiative, cutting other federal spending 0.43% to pay for it. a formal house-senate conference is expected to ratify the accord later this week.
the justice department is in the process of trying to gain control over a law that federal judge david sentelle recently called a "monster." needless to say, he was talking about rico. with its recently revised guidelines for rico, justice makes it clear that the law currently holds too many incentives for abuse by prosecutors. the text of the "new policy" guidelines from the criminal division are reprinted nearby. they strongly suggest that justice's prosecutions of drexel burnham lambert, michael milken and princeton/newport violated notions of fundamental fairness. justice is attempting to avoid a replay of these tactics. this amounts to an extraordinary repudiation of the tenure of new york mayoral candidate and former u.s. attorney rudolph giuliani, who was more inclined to gathering scalps than understanding markets. the new guidelines limit the pretrial forfeitures of assets of ricoed defendants and their investors, clients, bankers and others. this follows earlier new guidelines from the tax division prohibiting princeton/newport-like tax cases from masquerading as rico cases. the forfeiture memo cited "considerable criticism in the press, because of a perception that pre-trial freezing of assets is tantamount to a seizure of property without due process." it told prosecutors not to seek forfeitures if there are "less intrusive" alternatives, such as bonds, and in any case not to seek forfeitures "disproportionate to the defendant's crime." these changes come a tad late for princeton/newport, the first ricoed securities firm. it was forced into liquidation before trial when investors yanked their funds after the government demanded a huge pre-trial asset forfeiture. princeton/newport investors, including mckinsey & co. and the harvard endowment, made the rational decision to withdraw their money; for the firm, the liquidation was sentence first, verdict later. prosecutors wanted $23.8 million in forfeiture for alleged tax fraud of some $400,000. the experience of princeton/newport and initiation of other rico-forfeiture cases against legitimate businesses taught drexel that a ricoed investment bank would be an ex-investment bank. drexel therefore agreed instead to an arrangement allowing it to plea to charges "which the company is not in a position to dispute" because of rico. part of drexel's plea was to cut mr. milken loose. so after all the prosecutorial hoopla no one has established what, if anything, drexel did wrong. so two cheers for the new rules. justice has finally recognized its employees' abuses, thanks largely to the demands for reform by former u.s. attorney in washington joseph digenova, who wants to salvage rico for real criminals. but prosecutorial guidelines are effective only if someone at justice is willing and able to supervise hyperactive prosecutors. judge sentelle, of the appeals court in washington, made this point at a cato institute conference last week in a remarkable speech titled, "rico: the monster that ate jurisprudence." he said ours is supposed to be "a government of laws not of men," and yet rico defenders "tell us that we should rely on prosecutorial discretion to protect against overbreadth of rico." no prosecutorial guidelines, observed or unobserved, limit civil rico cases by plaintiffs for damages. what now for princeton/newport officials, drexel and mr. milken? justice should review these cases to see what other prosecutorial abuses may have occurred. we suspect that justice will some day agree that only the complete repeal of rico can guarantee an end to injustices in its name.
"the famous teddy z," which cbs inc. had hoped would emerge as one of the few bright spots in its otherwise lackluster prime-time schedule, isn't turning out to be the hit the network envisaged. although the half-hour situation comedy seen mondays at 9:30 p.m. eastern and pacific time isn't a candidate for cancellation, it is slated for fine-tuning and by next week the network may announce "teddy z" is moving to 8:30 p.m. from its 9:30 time slot, replacing "the people next door," which became the first network show to be canceled this season. "teddy z," which centers on a mailroom clerk-turned agent at a hollywood talent agency, was scheduled in the coveted 9:30 p.m. slot to follow "murphy brown," a situation comedy about a television news magazine, starring candice bergen. "teddy z" was boosted by favorable reviews and a network-wide promotional tie-in contest with k mart corp. it was promoted on cable services, including mtv, nick at night and vh-1, and premiered as the no. 22-rated show for the week. but five weeks after the premiere, the series has floundered. in figures released yesterday by a.c. nielsen co. "teddy z," produced by the television unit of columbia pictures entertainment inc., was in 37th place. worse, every week it suffers audience drop-off from "murphy brown" and viewership on cbs picks up again once "teddy z" is over and is followed by "designing women." "there is strong indication that `teddy z' is not compatible with the shows it is surrounding," said john sisk, senior vice president at j. walter thompson co., a unit of wpp group plc. last week, "murphy brown" was viewed by 14.1% of the available television households, while the number dropped to 12.6% for "teddy z" and rose to 14.2% for "designing women." cbs executives said the program is also slated to undergo some plot changes. creator hugh wilson, for example, included the lead character's greek family in the cast, "but that is not the right focus anymore," said one cbs executive. instead, cbs hopes the show will increasingly highlight the talent agency and the business of being an agent. "we're making adjustments on the show, yes, but nothing radical," said craig nelson, the story consultant on "teddy z." "but we hope to keep a balance between the office and the family." the opening credits are being redone, mr. nelson said, "to make teddy's situation clear to viewers who have not been with us since the beginning. those viewers find the show confusing."
the stock market's woes spooked currency traders but prompted a quiet little party among bond investors. prices of long-term treasury bonds moved inversely to the stock market as investors sought safety amid growing evidence the economy is weakening. but the shaky economic outlook and the volatile stock market forced the dollar lower against major currencies. the bond market got an early boost from the opening-hour sell-off in stocks. that rout was triggered by ual corp. 's announcement late monday that the proposed management-labor buy-out had collapsed. the 80-point decline in the dow jones industrial average during the morning trading session touched off a flight to safety that saw investors shifting assets from stocks to treasury bonds. at its strongest, the treasury's benchmark 30-year bond rose more than a point, or more than $10 for each $1,000 face amount. as the stock market recovered some of its losses later in the day, bond prices retreated. but analysts said the combination of a second consecutive decline in monthly durable-goods orders and lackluster mid-october auto sales helped prop up the treasury market. a slowing economy and the implication of lower inflation and interest rates tend to bolster bond prices. on the surface, the decline in september durable goods -- only 0.1% -- didn't appear very weak. but orders for non-defense capital goods, a precursor of future plant and equipment spending, were off 5.6% after falling 10.3% in august. auto makers reported that mid-october sales were running at an annual rate of about 5.8 million units, far less than the 6.6 million units analysts had expected. taken together, the auto-sales and durable-goods reports confirmed perceptions that the economy is bogging down. although analysts don't expect the federal reserve to ease credit policy soon, reports like those yesterday help build the case for lower rates. now bond investors are looking toward next week's report from national purchasing managers and the government's october employment report as potentially prompting the fed to lower rates. the stock market's precipitous drop frightened foreign investors, who quickly bid the dollar lower. but as stock prices recovered some of the early losses, so did the u.s. currency. although dealers said investors are becoming more bearish toward the dollar in the wake of the stock market's recent troubles and as the u.s. economy weakens, the dollar ended down only modestly. in major market activity: bond prices rose. the treasury's benchmark 30-year bond gained nearly half a point, or about $5 for each $1,000 face amount. the yield on the issue slipped to 7.89%. the dollar retreated. in late new york trading the currency was quoted at 1.8355 marks and 141.45 yen, compared with 1.8470 marks and 141.90 yen monday.
"lifestyles of the rich and famous" may be visiting some new venues in the near future. judge robert ("maximum bob") potter sentenced jim bakker to 45 years in the big house yesterday, while a beverly hills judge tucked away zsa zsa gabor for three days, plus 120 hours of work with homeless women. miss gabor recanted her earlier-expressed fear of jailhouse lesbians. mr. bakker said he was guilty of sin but not fraud. we can only wonder who will be the next lost soul chosen to be america's celebrity convict.
boeing co. said trans european airways ordered a dozen 737 jetliners valued at a total of about $450 million. the 300 and 400 series aircraft will be powered by engines jointly produced by general electric co. and snecma of france. currently, boeing has a backlog of about $80 billion, but production has been slowed by a strike of 55,000 machinists, which entered its 22nd day today. last week, a mediator failed to rekindle talks between the company and the strikers, who have rejected a pay raise offer of 10% over three years.
when the good fairy assigned to slovakia hovered over the cradle of edita gruberova many years ago in bratislava, she sprinkled her with high e flats, sparkling ds, clean trills, and coloratura ornaments silvery as magic dust. maybe she could drop by at the metropolitan opera and bring along what she forgot, a little charm, a few smidgins of thespian skills and a nice wig. cast as violetta valery in a new production of verdi's "la traviata," ms. gruberova last week did many things nicely and others not so well. it isn't every day that we hear a violetta who can sing the first act's high-flying music with all the little notes perfectly pitched and neatly stitched together. never once did she gasp for air or mop her brow. she was as cool as a cucumber. but as you may know, things are not going well for violetta. there are times when she must show a little emotion. she has tb, after all, and a weak-kneed lover; and though a successful courtesan, she is just about overdrawn at the bank. worse, her walls move all the time -- at least in this production. just when ms. gruberova sat down away from her guests to cough in private, her salon began sliding around the stage; her country hideaway also has a very active set of drapes. hold on to those funny braids! you wanted to caution her as the sets started to roll around once more. this is the most moving "traviata" i've ever seen. normally, violetta can go about her business without wondering whether she is moving as gracefully as the scenery. but this is a production designed and directed by franco zeffirelli and paid for by sybil harrington, who has no need to count her pennies, unlike violetta, down to 20 louis at the opera's end. seeing all those millions in action, i was just so relieved that ms. gruberova, gawky thing that she is, didn't accidentally smother herself in a drape. large and lavish, "traviata" is another addition to the met's growing stock of cast-proof productions mostly by mr. zeffirelli. they have a life of their own and can be counted on to look good and perform whenever a cast isn't up to either. if a strike ever hits the met, the company can still sell tickets to his "boheme" and "turandot" and boom out recordings (of another era). last week's discerning audience gave a bigger hand to a greenhouse than to the tenor neil shicoff, who sang an aria inside it. inexplicably costumed as a rabbinical student, tottering around on lifts, mr. shicoff hardly seemed the fellow to catch a fancy cocotte's eye. i wish he could wear lifts in his voice. not nearly in his best form, the tenor made dullish sounds along with his usual clumsy hand gestures. maybe mr. z. was too busy taming his set to work with his naturally ungainly alfredo. or is it that mr. z. is getting a little tired of "traviata"? this is the same production already seen in paris and florence, and its scenic ideas echo the movie he made with placido domingo and teresa stratas. decades earlier, maria callas sang the dallas staging that introduced the flashback idea. in an invention that drives verdi purists bananas, violetta lies dying in bed during the prelude, rising deliriously when then she remembers the great parties she used to throw. the entire opera is her dream. given the prelude's thematic connections with the music preceding the last act, the idea is more worn than bad, though as luck would have it, for a change there actually was a conductor in the pit whom we wanted to hear, carlos kleiber, trying to make memorable music while we all waited for the bed lump to stir into song. once she did so, the big-souled german maestro with the shaky nerves who so often cancels offered a limpid, flowing performance that in its unswagged and unswaggering approach was totally at odds with the staging. of heart-pounding moments there were nearly none, and whether this has to do with mr. kleiber or the wooden cast is hard to say. in any event, ms. gruberova barely ventilated violetta's anguish in her long meeting with wolfgang brendel, who as germont seemed fairly desperate trying to inject an italianate lilt into his heavy, teutonic baritone. "di provenza" wasn't much of an advertisement for sunny, southern france. perhaps mr. kleiber could let him substitute one of the songs about dead children and dark nights from mahler's "kindertotenlieder." speaking of dark nights, the met's next-door neighbor, the new york city opera, has canceled its season after failing to reach a settlement with its musicians, who wanted pay parity with the the chicago lyric and san francisco opera orchestras. well, they can now go and audition there. good luck. common sense suggests that people who play for a company that charges about half what those houses do for a ticket are not in the same market. the cancellation bodes poorly for a company already beset with an identity crisis exacerbated by the retirement of general director beverly sills and the amazing appointment of christopher keene as her successor after his years of feckless toiling in the pit. as the met discovered years ago following a belated december opening, it is nearly impossible to recapture subscribers once they have had time to ponder their entertainment choices. i, for instance, was perfectly happy at avery fisher hall the other day listening to helmuth rilling conduct the messa per rossini, a strange piece written by 13 different italian composers to honor rossini after his death in 1868. each of them contributed a section at the behest of verdi, who was nearly driven to his own early grave by the troublesome arrangements. for all that, the piece landed unperformed in a dusty archive after bologna refused to supply a chorus and orchestra. we know verdi's own contribution was mighty impressive since the operatic "libera me" was reworked for the manzoni requiem, of which he wrote every note himself having learned his lesson. the surprising discovery of the evening at fisher was the high standard achieved by some of his now-obscure colleagues, notably raimondo boucheron. his melodious "confutatis" was smoothly sung by bass brian matthews. also, teodulo mabellini's "lux aeterna" was intriguingly scored and splendidly put across by mr. rilling. he brought along his stuttgart-based gaechinger kantorei chorus, and even better, the czech soprano gabriela benackova. she was in her most radiant, expressive voice. maybe she could step across the plaza to the met -- where she has still to make her debut -- and help out her czech compatriot by singing the slow parts of "traviata." the tokyo international film festival was no match for the cannes film festival in terms of prestige, but it made its mark: it awarded the largest cash prize of any film festival to young and first-time film makers. at this year's event, the third since the festival got under way in 1985, idrissa ouedraogo of burkina faso won the sakura gold prize of $143,000 for "yaaba" ("old woman"). by comparison, cannes now gives $39,000 to the winner of its young director's award. says director george miller ("mad max"): "i think the tokyo festival may become known as a major attraction for young directors because of the money as well as the recognition." there are drawbacks. vincent tolentino, a correspondent for the french magazine telerama, says of the recently ended tokyo festival: "no one makes deals . . . and most of the films have been seen before at other festivals." belgium decided that investors who demand the delivery of their securities when they buy shares or domestic bonds will have to pay an additional 100 belgian francs (about $2.60) for each transaction, bringing the total fee to 200 francs. while no figures exist, it is thought that many small investors in belgium store securities privately, in some cases to avoid paying high inheritance taxes. the law could redound to the advantage of brokers and banks, who incur high administrative costs to deliver securities to investors. japan is considering giving aid to hungary and poland to support their recent political reforms, a spokesman for the foreign ministry said. "this is the first time, if we decide to do so, for japan to extend aid of this kind to eastern european countries," the spokesman said. he said prime minister toshiki kaifu also is studying the possibility of a visit to the two eastern bloc nations and to western europe next january. drugs were a major issue in two days of talks between french president francois mitterrand and spanish prime minister felipe gonzalez. "i demand the utmost severity in the fight against drug traffickers," president mitterrand said after the meeting in valladolid, spain. he added: "banks must open their books." the leaders' talks coincided with a meeting in madrid of anti-drug experts from the u.s., france, italy, spain, peru, bolivia and colombia. that conference, which began yesterday, was expected to cover such matters as police training and extradition agreements, spanish officials said. three soviet government officials -- the ministers of railroads, of foreign economic relations and of heavy-machine building -- will visit tehran next month for talks, iran's official news agency reported. under an agreement signed last june, the soviets will help iran in oil exploration and other areas in return for exports of iranian natural gas. and in paris, mahmoud vaezi, iran's vice minister of foreign affairs, began a five-day visit to discuss such matters as compensation to french enterprises for contracts broken by the khomeini regime. toto co., a japanese ceramics maker, has developed a toilet that can check the user's health. a toto spokesman said the toilet not only tests blood pressure, pulse and urine, it also stores the data for up to 130 days. nippon telegraph & telephone corp. and omron tateisi electronics are involved with toto's new product, which will go on the market in about two years time. "it will be very expensive," the spokesman warned. "the price cannot be less than $7,000." since mexican president carlos salinas de gortari took office last december, special agents have arrested more than 6,000 federal employees on charges ranging from extortion to tax evasion. hector castaneda jimenez, chief prosecutor at the attorney general's office, said that an estimated $82.8 million in government property and unpaid taxes have been recovered in the campaign to root out official corruption. mr. castaneda's office will reportedly issue warrants during the next six months for the arrest of another 10,000 federal employees. those employees are suspected of illegally gaining an estimated $376.8 million, the prosecutor was quoted as saying by the excelsior news service. he added that federal agents hope to recover at least half that amount. "the rest will probably not be recoverable either because the statute of limitations expired or because many prefer to spend additional time in jail rather than return the money," the prosecutor said. the united nations, which is distributing farm tools to returning refugees in namibia, is rethinking a plan to hand out machetes because of the tense political climate during preparations for independence from south africa. "the decision to distribute machetes at this time, which could be used as weapons, is under review," said a u.n. spokesman. . . . sources close to the family of pakistani prime minister benazir bhutto said she is expecting a second child, probably early next year.
cray research inc. forecast that 1990 will be a no-growth year for its supercomputer line. in what has become a series of bad-news announcements, the world's largest maker of supercomputers said that after reviewing its order prospects, "we have concluded it is prudent to plan for next year on the assumption that revenue again will be flat." cray jolted the market in july when it slashed revenue and earnings projections for this year, citing a slowing economy that has delayed orders from government as well as commercial customers. the company made its 1990 projection -- an unusual event for cray -- in announcing improved net income for the third quarter. cray said it earned $30.6 million, or $1.04 a share, up 35% from $22.6 million, or 73 cents a share, a year ago. revenue gained 45% to $210.2 million from $145.2 million. for the nine months, earnings totaled $36.6 million, or $1.24 a share, down 46% from $68.1 million, or $2.19 a share, a year earlier. revenue was $454.6 million, a 6.9% gain from $425.4 million. cray made its announcement after the stock market closed. in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday, cray closed down $1.125 at $34.25. cray said its order backlog at sept. 30 was $315 million, down $25 million from june 30. marcello gumucio, president, said the company "did well in the quarter as far as revenues and earnings are concerned, and not quite as well in terms of signing orders." as for the current period, mr. gumucio said, "we anticipate that fourth-quarter revenue and earnings will be substantially greater than any of the preceding three quarters, but not up to the record levels of last year's fourth quarter" when cray earned $88.5 million, or $2.80 a share. he added that the company expects "strong" operating profit for the year, "but at a level significantly lower than last year." he said 1989's net income could be 11% to 13% of revenue, which, assuming current expectations, would be 40% to 45% below 1988's level. last year, cray earned $156.6 million, or $4.99 a share, on revenue of $756.3 million. next year "looks dismal," said analyst paul luber of robert baird & co., milwaukee. noting that cray doesn't have a low-end supercomputer to compete with the likes of convex computer corp. and international business machines corp., mr. luber said such a machine would be necessary "to get things back on line here." cray has indicated it will decide on whether to build such a machine before year end.
johnson & johnson reported a 10% rise in third-quarter net income on a 12% sales increase -results that were driven particularly by new products including pharmaceuticals and the company's professional operations. net for the new brunswick, n.j., maker of health-care products climbed to $265 million, or 80 cents a share, from $240 million, or 71 cents a share, in the year-earlier period. sales rose to $2.45 billion from $2.2 billion. the year-ago per-share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split last may. in a statement, ralph s. larsen, chairman and chief executive officer, said the company was pleased with its third-quarter sales performance, "especially in light of the extremely competitive environment in domestic consumer markets and the negative impact of unfavorable exchange rates this quarter." david j. lothson, an industry analyst for painewebber group inc., said johnson & johnson's results slightly exceeded his expectations for the third quarter. in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday, johnson & johnson shares fell 37.5 cents to $54.625. mr. larsen noted "substantial sales growth" for the recently introduced acuvue disposable contact lens and hismanal, a once-a-day antihistamine. eprex, used by dialysis patients who are anemic, and prepulsid, a gastro-intestinal drug, did well overseas, he said. despite health-care cost controls and programs to hold down inventory, the professional division, which makes products including sutures and surgical stapling equipment, "achieved solid growth," johnson & johnson said. but domestic consumer sales slipped 1.2% for the quarter, to $490 million from $496 million. the company cited softness in the retail health and beauty aids category, "as well as the intense competition in the company's sanitary protection product line." overseas sales were stronger, principally because of a rebound in brazil, where economic turmoil had hurt year-earlier results, johnson & johnson said. mr. lothson of painewebber said the company's sales pace has been picking up largely because the effect of unfavorable exchange rates has been easing -- a pattern continuing this quarter. he cautioned, however, that a "tough tax-rate comparison" may slow the company's earnings growth for the current quarter. for last year's fourth quarter, the company's tax rate was less than 20%, he said. while the third period contained no major surprises, mr. lothson said, the results show how sensitive the multinationals can be to developments in a single country such as brazil. he also questioned whether recent gains in that country can be sustained. the following issues were recently filed with the securities and exchange commission: bergen brunswig corp., proposed offering of liquid yield option notes, via merrill lynch capital markets. columbia gas system inc., shelf offering of up to $200 million of debentures. laserscope, initial offering of 1,656,870 common shares, of which 1,455,000 shares are to be sold by the company and 201,870 by holders, via alex. brown & sons inc. and volpe, covington & welty. televideo systems inc., proposed offering of 1,853,735 common shares, to be sold by holders. western gas system inc., initial offering of 3,250,000 common shares, of which 3,040,000 shares will be sold by the company and 210,000 by a holder, via prudential-bache capital funding, smith barney, harris upham & co. and hanifen, imhoff inc.
insiders have been selling shares in dun & bradstreet corp., the huge credit-information concern. six top executives at the new york-based company sold shares in august and september. four of those insiders sold more than half their holdings. the stock, in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday, closed at $51.75, up 62.5 cents, well below the $56.13 to $60 a share the insiders received for their shares. much of the recent slide in dun & bradstreet's stock came late last week, after negative comments by analysts at merrill lynch & co. and goldman, sachs & co. a company spokesman declined to comment and said that the officials who sold shares wouldn't comment. one of dun & bradstreet's chief businesses is compiling reports that rate the credit-worthiness of millions of american companies. it also owns moody's investors service, which assigns credit-ratings to bonds and preferred stock; a.c. nielsen, known for its data on television-viewing patterns, and yellow-pages publisher donnelley. last march, this newspaper reported on widespread allegations that the company misled many customers into purchasing more credit-data services than needed. in june, the company agreed to settle for $18 million several lawsuits related to its sales practices, without admitting or denying the charges. an investigation by u.s. postal inspectors is continuing. among the insider sales, charles raikes, the firm's general counsel, sold 12,281 shares in august, representing 46% of his holdings in the company. he received $724,579 for the shares, according to insider filings with the securities and exchange commission. john c. holt, an executive vice president and dun & bradstreet director, sold 10,000 shares on aug. 31 for $588,800, filings show. he retains 9,232 shares. william h.j. buchanan, the firm's secretary and associate general counsel, sold 7,000 shares in two separate sales in september for $406,000. the shares represented 66% of his dun & bradstreet holdings, according to the company. the other insiders, all senior or executive vice presidents, sold between 2,520 and 6,881 shares, representing between 8% and 70% of their holdings, according to sec filings. dun & bradstreet's stock price began its recent spiral downward last wednesday, when the company reported third-quarter results. net income rose to 83 cents a share from 72 cents a share the year-earlier period. but analysts focused more on the drop in revenue, to $1.04 billion from $1.07 billion, reflecting in part a continuing drop in sales of the controversial credit-reporting services. last thursday, merrill lynch securities analyst peter falco downgraded his investment rating on the firm, according to dow jones professional investors report, citing a slowdown in the credit-reporting business. he cut his rating to a short-term hold from above-average performer and reduced his 1990 earnings estimate. mr. falco continues to rank the stock a longterm buy. the stock slid $1.875 on more than four times average daily volume. the stock received another blow on friday, when goldman sachs analyst eric philo advised that investors with short-term horizons should avoid dun & bradstreet stock because it is unlikely to outperform the market. the stock fell 75 cents. insider selling is not unusual at dun & bradstreet; in fact, the recent pace of selling is just about average for the company, according to figures compiled by invest/net, a north miami, fla., firm that specializes in tracking and analyzing sec insider filings. but previous sales have often been sales of shares purchased through the exercise of stock options and sold six months later, as soon as allowed, said robert gabele, president of invest/net. the most recent sales don't appear to be option-related, he said. tasty profits: michael a. miles, chief executive officer of philip morris cos. ' kraft general foods unit, bought 6,000 shares of the company on sept. 22 for $157 each. the $942,000 purchase raised his holdings to 74,000 shares. the stock split four-for-one on oct. 10. mr. miles's newly purchased shares are now worth $1,068,000, based on philip morris's closing price of $44.50, up 62.5 cents, in composite trading on the new york stock exchange yesterday. a spokesman for mr. miles said he bought the shares because he felt they were "a good investment." the executive made his purchases shortly before being named to his current chief executive officer's position; formerly he was kraft general foods' chief operating officer. shedding glitter: two directors of pegasus gold inc., a spokane, wash., precious-metals mining firm, sold most of their holdings in the company aug. 31. john j. crabb sold 4,500 shares for $11.13 each, leaving himself with a stake of 500 shares. he received $50,085. peter kutney sold 5,000 shares, all of his holdings, for $11.38 a share, or $56,900. gary straub, corporate counsel for the company, said the directors sold for "personal financial reasons." both insiders declined to comment. on wall street, merrill lynch & co. analyst daniel a. roling rates the stock "neutral" and drexel burnham lambert inc. lists it as a "buy." pegasus gold "has been on a lot of recommended lists as a junior growth company stepping into the big leagues," says marty mcneill, metals analyst at dominick & dominick, a new york investment firm. "it's a good company, and growing; there's nothing that would warrant that it be sold." yesterday, in composite trading on the american stock exchange, pegasus closed at $10.125, up 12.5 cents.
medieval philosophers used to hold the sensible belief that it was more perfect to exist than not to exist, and that to exist as a matter of necessity was most perfect of all. now, only god exists as a matter of absolute necessity; it is built into his nature. but since the time of darwin, we humans could at least claim a sort of natural necessity for the existence of our species. aren't we, after all, the inevitable culmination of that stately pageant called evolution? if mutation and natural selection slowly but surely give rise to more and more advanced forms of life, then it was only a matter of eons before splendid beings endowed with reason, self-awareness and taste shimmered onto the scene. now along comes stephen jay gould to dash this flattering illusion. his credentials are excellent for the task. star lecturer at harvard, author of numerous popular books on science, and scourge of the creationist lobby, mr. gould is perhaps the world's most eminent evolutionary theorist. yet he puts quite a twist on the old story handed down from darwin. for him, natural history is anything but a gradual, predictable march from primordial slime to human consciousness; it is a careening, chaotic affair in which the emergence of a featherless biped was a one-in-a-million shot. in "wonderful life: the burgess shale and the nature of history" (norton, 326 pages, $19.95), mr. gould makes his case for "the awesome improbability of human evolution." the argument turns on the discovery in 1909 of an amazing fossil quarry high in the canadian rockies called the burgess shale. here, in an area smaller than a city block, lay buried traces of countless weird creatures that had frolicked more than 500 million years ago - - creatures whose anatomical variety far exceeded what can be found in all the world's oceans today. such an embarrassment of riches was inconceivable to the man who discovered the burgess shale, one charles doolittle walcott. the received darwinian wisdom of the day said that animals living so long ago must be simple in design, limited in scope and ancestral to contemporary species. accordingly, the hidebound traditionalist reconstructed hypothetical organisms from the burgess fossils in such a way that they could be shoehorned into familiar categories. it was not until the early 1970s that cambridge prof. harry whittington and two sharp graduate students began to publish a reinterpretation of the burgess shale. by making clever inferences about how the squashed and distorted fossil remains corresponded to three-dimensional structures, this trio was able to piece together a series of wondrous beasties quite unlike anything currently on the planet. one was so fantastic in appearance, it was dubbed hallucigenia. would that mr. gould's minute descriptions of these creatures was always so colorful. a good deal of the book is boring, particularly the endless allusions to high and pop culture and the frequent jokes festooning the text. these turns do not provide sufficient relief from sentences like, "most modern chelicerates have six uniramous appendages on the prosoma." interest picks up, though, when mr. gould gets around to discussing the meaning of the burgess oddities for the theory of evolution. not long after the appearance of life, evidently, there was an explosive proliferation in the number of animal designs seen on the earth. the vast majority of them, however, were wiped out by a succession of environmental upheavals that were too sudden and catastrophic for the normal rules of natural selection to operate. consequently, the winnowing process was like a lottery "in which each group {held} a ticket unrelated to its anatomical virtues." so much for survival of the fittest. so much, too, for the notion that we humans triumphed in the darwinian struggle by evolving big brains. our mammalian forerunners lucked out through the extraterrestrial impact that did in the dinosaurs because they were small, not smart. if anyone has difficulty imagining a world in which history went merrily on without us, mr. gould sketches several. in one, birds are the dominant carnivores; in another the seas abound with "little penises." back when the burgess fauna were flourishing, it seems, human evolutionary hopes hung on the survival of a little worm with a backbone called pikaia. mr. gould finds this oddly exhilarating; like an existentialist of old, he views our contingency as "a source of both freedom and consequent moral responsibility." i, by contrast, cannot help feeling that if some other curiosity from the burgess shale had survived instead, beings at once wiser and less boorish than homo sapiens might have eventually gained earthly dominion. but even if no conscious life had evolved here at all, the universe is a big place, and given the right conditions, sympathetic to creating some form of life. surely at some other cosmic address a gouldoid creature would have risen out of the ooze to explain why, paleontologically speaking, "it is, indeed, a wonderful life." mr. holt is a columnist for the literary review in london.
the justice department scrambled to play down the significance of its new guidelines concerning prosecutions under the federal racketeering law. the guidelines were distributed to u.s. attorneys last summer but were disclosed for the first time by press reports this week. they discourage prosecutors, under certain circumstances, from seeking court orders seizing the assets of racketeering defendants prior to trial. but david runkel, chief justice department spokesman, said the guidelines "are a codification and a clarification far more than a new direction." use of the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations law against white-collar defendants, as opposed to alleged organized-crime figures, has come under attack from some defense lawyers and legal scholars. critics have complained that the law unfairly strips defendants of assets before a jury determines they have committed a crime and that aggressive use of the forfeiture provisions can ruin corporate defendants or force them into unfavorable plea bargains. in the new guidelines, the justice department says that in attempting to freeze disputed assets before trial, "the government will not seek to disrupt the normal, legitimate business activities of the defendant" and "will not seek. . .to take from third parties assets legitimately transferred to them." the guidelines also state, "the government's policy is not to seek the fullest forfeiture permissible under the law where that forfeiture would be disproportionate to the defendant's crime." another provision clarifies certain limits on when prosecutors may use tax-fraud charges as a basis for bringing a racketeering case. mr. runkel declined to speculate on whether the guidelines would curb racketeering prosecutions against corporate defendants. "the impact, if there is any, will be impossible to judge ahead of time because the decision whether to use {racketeering charges} is made in individual cases" by justice department officials in washington, he said. in a memorandum describing the guidelines, assistant attorney general edward dennis jr. said that government efforts to freeze defendants' assets pending racketeering prosecutions "have been the subject of considerable criticism in the press." but mr. runkel said the government isn't "backing off on these kinds of matters at all."
california legislators, searching for ways to pay for the $4 billion to $6 billion in damages from last week's earthquake, are laying the groundwork for a temporary increase in the state's sales tax. the talk of a sales tax rise follows a rebuff from congress on the question of how much the federal government is willing to spend to aid in california's earthquake relief efforts. the state had sought as much as $4.1 billion in relief, but yesterday the house approved a more general scaled-back measure calling for $2.85 billion in aid, the bulk of which would go to california, with an unspecified amount going to regions affected by hurricane hugo. that leaves the state roughly $2 billion to $4 billion short. a sales tax increase appears to be the fastest and easiest to raise funds in a hurry. according to the state department of finance, a one-penny increase in the state's six-cent per dollar sales tax could raise $3 billion. willie brown, speaker of california's assembly, said that gov. george deukmejian has agreed to schedule a special session of the legislature within two weeks. california's so-called gann limit effectively prevents the state from spending new tax money and so drastically limits its options in an emergency. both mr. brown, the state's most influential legislator, and gov. deukmejian favor a temporary sales tax increase -- should more money be needed than the state can raise from existing sources and the federal government. according to a spokesman, the governor is also studying the possibility of raising state gasoline taxes. mr. brown, meanwhile, believes "only one tax will be feasible, and it will be a one-penny sales tax increase," said chuck dalldorf, an aide. one immediate source of money is an emergency fund set up by gov. deukmejian. the fund has about $1 billion and is set up to handle "precisely the kind of emergency" the state faces, said tom beermann, the governor's deputy press secretary. but the fund's size is disputed by mr. brown's office, which estimates the fund holds from $630 million to $800 million. moreover, an aide to mr. brown said gov. deukmejian "has expressed a desire not to spend all the reserve on this." to push through a sales tax increase, however, the state will have to suspend the gann limit, citing an emergency. and then it will be required to lower taxes by a corresponding amount during a three-year period after the temporary tax increase ends, said cindy katz, assistant director of the state department of finance. a sales tax increase would require two-thirds approval in both houses of the state's legislature. but observers expect broad support. "if there's an emergency and there aren't sufficient funds from elsewhere, i think the attitude will be supportive," said kirk west, president of the california chamber of commerce. but others think property owners ought to pay a higher portion of the state's earthquake relief tab. since the late 1970s, california property owners have benefited from a tax rollback as a result of a state ballot initiative known as proposition 13. the state could also increase gasoline taxes; every one penny increase in the tax would yield $11 million a month. but gov. deukmejian and others are reluctant to do anything to harm the state's chances of sharply raising gasoline taxes on a permanent basis. to raise more highway funds, a measure to double the state's nine-cent a gallon tax over five years is set to appear on the state's june election ballot. but some fear imposing a temporary gasoline tax increase in the meantime could undercut support among voters for the measure. not everyone is convinced the state must raise new revenue to meet its earthquake needs. "it's possible, though not probable," that the state could get by with its existing resources and federal help, said quentin kopp, chairman of the state senate's transportation committee. separately, two men injured in last week's earthquake-triggered freeway collapse in oakland began a legal battle against the state over whether officials adequately heeded warnings about the structure's safety. the claims, which were filed with the state board of control but will probably end up in court, are the first arising out of the collapse of the so-called cypress structure viaduct. the men can defeat immunities that states often assert in court by showing that officials knew or should have known that design of the structure was defective and that they failed to make reasonable changes. a board of control spokesman said the board had not seen the claim and declined to comment.
the following were among yesterday's offerings and pricings in the u.s. and non-u.s. capital markets, with terms and syndicate manager, as compiled by dow jones capital markets report: exxon capital corp. -- $200 million of 8 1/4% notes due nov. 1, 1999, priced at 99.60 to yield 8.31%. the notes, which are noncallable, were priced at a spread of 45 basis points above the treasury's 10-year note. rated triple-a by both moody's investors service inc. and standard & poor's corp., the issue will be sold through salomon brothers inc. citicorp -- $200 million of 8 3/4% notes due nov. 1, 1996, priced at 99.64 to yield 8.82%. the noncallable issue was priced at a spread of 98 basis points above the treasury's seven-year note. rated single-a-1 by moody's and double-a by s&p, the issue will be sold through salomon brothers. boatmen's bancshares inc. -- $150 million of 9 1/4% subordinated notes due nov. 1, 2001, priced at 99.821 to yield 9.275%. the noncallable issue was priced at a spread of 140 basis points above the treasury's 10-year note. rated single-a-3 by moody's and single-a-minus by s&p, the issue will be sold through underwriters led by morgan stanley & co. xerox corp. -- $150 million of 8 3/4% notes due nov. 1, 1995, priced at 99.555 to yield 8.85%. the noncallable issue was priced to yield 105 basis points above the treasury's fiveyear note. rated single-a-2 by moody's and single-a-plus by s&p, the issue will be sold through underwriters led by salomon brothers. american general finance corp. -- $150 million of 8.45% notes due oct. 15, 2009, through bear, stearns & co., being offered at a price of 99.661 to yield 8.50%. the noncallable issue, which has a one-time put oct. 15, 1999, was priced at a spread of 66 basis points above the treasury's 10-year note. the issue is rated single-a-1 by moody's and single-a-plus by s&p. baltimore gas & electric co. -- $100 million of first and refunding mortgage bonds, due oct. 15, 1999, through shearson lehman hutton inc., offered at par to yield 8.40%. the noncallable issue is rated double-a-3 by moody's and double-a-minus by s&p. it was priced at a spread of 55 basis points above the treasury's 10-year note. massachusetts -- $230 million of general obligation bonds, consolidated loan of 1989, series d, due 1990-2009, through a goldman, sachs & co. group. the insured bonds, rated triple-a by moody's and s&p, were priced to yield from 6.00% in 1990 to 7.20% in 2009. broward county school district, fla. -- $185 million of school district general obligation bonds, series 1989, due 1991-1999 and 2008, tentatively priced by a first boston corp. group to yield from 6.20% in 1991 to 7.30% in 2008. there are $120.7 million of 7 1/8% term bonds due 2008, priced to yield 7.30%. serial bonds are priced to yield to 7% in 1999. the bonds are rated single-a-1 by moody's and double-a-minus by s&p. culver city redevelopment financing authority, calif. -- $145 million of revenue bonds, series 1989, tentatively priced by a stone & youngberg group. the issue includes $100 million of insured senior lien bonds. these consist of current interest bonds due 1990-2002, 2010 and 2015, and capital appreciation bonds due 2003 and 2004, tentatively priced to yield from 5.75% in 1990 to 7.14% in 2010. bonds due 2003, 2004 and 2015 aren't being formally reoffered. there are also $40 million of uninsured subordinate lien bonds, due dec. 1, 2008, and dec. 1, 2015. there are $15,015,000 of 7 1/2% bonds priced at par and due 2008 and $24,985,000 of 7.6% bonds priced at par and due 2015. the insured bonds are rated triple-a by moody's and s&p. the uninsured subordinate lien bonds aren't rated, according to the lead underwriter. west virginia parkways, economic development and <tourism authority -- $143 million of parkway revenue bonds, series 1989, with current interest bonds due 1990-2002 and 2019 and capital appreciation bonds due 2003-2008, tentatively priced by a painewebber inc. group to yield from 6% in 1990 to 7.31% in 2019. there are $86,525,000 of 7 1/8% bonds priced at 97 3/4 to yield 7.31% in 2019. current interest serial bonds are tentatively priced to yield to 7.05% in 2002. capital appreciation bonds are priced to yield to maturity from 7.10% in 2003 to 7.25% in 2007 and 2008. the bonds are insured and rated triple-a by moody's and s&p. connecticut housing finance authority -- $132.8 million of housing mortgage revenue bonds priced by a painewebber inc. group. the $82.8 million of series b bonds, which aren't subject to the alternative minimum tax, were priced at par to yield from 6.85% in 2000 to 7.20% in 2009. meanwhile, the $50 million of series c bonds, which are suject to the alternative minimum tax, were priced at par to yield from 6.25% in 1990 to 7.10% to 2000. the issue is expected to receive a double-a rating from moody's, the underwriter said. an s&p rating of double-a-plus has already been confirmed. montgomery county, md. -- $75 million of general obligation, series b, consolidated public improvement bonds of 1989, through a manufacturers hanover trust co. group. the bonds, rated triple-a by moody's and s&p, were priced to yield from 5.75% in 1990 to 6.90% in 2006 to 2009. federal home loan mortgage corp. -- $500 million of remic mortgage securities being offered by prudential-bache capital funding inc. there were no details available on the pricing of the issue, freddie mac's series 108. the issue is backed by freddie mac 8 1/2% securities. hanwa co. (japan) -- two-part, $800 million issue of bonds due nov. 9, 1994, with equity-purchase warrants, indicating a 4 3/8% coupon at par. european portion of $700 million via yamaichi international europe ltd. asian portion of $100 million via yamatane securities europe ltd. each $5,000 bond carries one warrant, exercisable from nov. 28, 1989, through oct. 26, 1994, to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1/2% to the closing share price when terms are fixed oct. 26. japan storage battery co. -- $100 million of bonds due nov. 9, 1993, with equity-purchase warrants, indicating a 3 7/8% coupon at par via nikko securities co. (europe) ltd. guaranteed by mitsubishi bank ltd. each $5,000 bond carries one warrant, exercisable from nov. 27, 1989, through oct. 26, 1993, to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1/2% to the closing share price when terms are fixed nov. 1. sanraku inc. (japan) -- $100 million of bonds due nov. 9, 1993, with equity-purchase warrants, indicating a 3 7/8% coupon at par, via nomura international. guaranteed by dai-ichi kangyo bank ltd. each $5,000 bond carries one warrant, exercisable from nov. 21, 1989, through oct. 19, 1993, to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1/2% to the closing share price when terms are fixed oct. 31. nippon signal co. (japan) -- 80 million marks of bonds with equity-purchase warrants, indicating a 1 1/2% coupon, due nov. 9, 1994, and priced at par, via commerzbank. guaranteed by fuji bank. each 5,000 mark bond carries one warrant and one certificate for four warrants, exercisable from dec. 18, 1989, to oct. 26, 1994, to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1/2% above the closing share price when prices are fixed oct. 30. miyoshi oil & fat co. (japan) -- 120 million swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due dec. 31, 1993, with a fixed 0.25% coupon at par, via union bank of switzerland. put option on dec. 31, 1991, at a fixed 107 to yield 3.43%. each 50,000 swiss franc bond convertible from nov. 28, 1989, to dec. 20, 1993, at a 5% premium over closing share price oct. 30, when terms are scheduled to be fixed. fokker n.v. (netherlands) -- 150 million swiss francs of convertible bonds due nov. 15, 1997, with a fixed 4% coupon at par via union bank of switzerland. each 5,000 swiss franc bond convertible from jan. 3, 1989, to oct. 31, 1997. fees 2 1/8. sapporo lion ltd. (japan) -- 50 million swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due dec. 31, 1994, with a 0.25% coupon at par, via yamaichi bank (switzerland). put option on dec. 31, 1991, at an indicated 107 7/8 to yield 3.84%. each 50,000 swiss franc note convertible from dec. 1, 1989, to dec. 16, 1994, at 5% premium over the closing share price oct. 26, when terms are scheduled to be fixed. credit local de france -- 100 million swiss francs of 6%, privately placed notes due dec. 1, 1996, priced at 100 1/2 to yield 5.91%, via swiss bank corp.
people start their own businesses for many reasons. but a chance to fill out sales-tax records is rarely one of them. red tape is the bugaboo of small business. ironically, the person who wants to run his or her own business is probably the active, results-oriented sort most likely to hate meeting the rules and record-keeping demands of federal, state and local regulators. yet every business owner has to face the mound of forms and regulations -- and often is the only one available to tackle it. there is hope of change. last week, sen. malcolm wallop (r., wyo.) held hearings on a bill to strengthen an existing law designed to reduce regulatory hassles for small businesses. "a great many federal regulations are meant for larger entities and don't really apply to small businesses," says marian jacob, a legislative aide to sen. wallop. other lawmakers are busy trying to revive the recently lapsed paperwork reduction act, which many feel benefited small enterprises. thus, optimistic entrepreneurs await a promised land of less red tape -- just as soon as uncle sam gets around to arranging it. meanwhile, they tackle the mounds of paper -- and fantasize about a dream world where bulk-mail postal regulations and government inspectors are banished. to find out what red tape riles entrepreneurs most, the journal asked a completely unscientific, random sample of business owners to fantasize about the forms and regulations they would most like to get lost in the mail. some entrepreneurs say the red tape they most love to hate is red tape they would also hate to lose. they concede that much of the government meddling that torments them is essential to the public good, and even to their own businesses. rules that set standards for products or govern business behavior, generally the best regarded form of red tape, "create a level playing field and keep unscrupulous competitors away," says sidney west, president of techdesign international inc., a springfield, va., business that designs telecommunication and other products. mr. west cites the federal communications commission and its standards for telecommunications equipment: "they monitor product quality and prevent junk from flooding the market." some gripes about red tape are predictable: architects complain about a host of building regulations, auto leasing companies about car insurance rules. determining when handicapped access is required can be a nightmare for architects, says mark dooling, president of dooling & co., a newton, mass., architectural firm. there is such a maze of federal, state and local codes that "building inspectors are backing away from interpreting them," mr. dooling says. taxi, leasing and other companies that maintain fleets of vehicles devote substantial resources to complying with state insurance laws and a host of agencies. "it's very costly and time-consuming," says phil rosen, a partner in fleet & leasing management inc., a boston car-leasing company. one senior executive at his firm spends nearly 20% of his time on insurance, he says. other forms of red tape are more pervasive. the most onerous, many entrepreneurs say, is the record-keeping and filing required by tax authorities. complying with environmental and workplace regulations runs a close second. but gripes run the gamut. here is the red tape that irks surveyed business owners the most: environmental regulations: next to medical insurance, "costs of compliance" are the fastest-growing expense at impco inc., a providence, r.i., chemical company. peter gebhard, the company's owner, says spending on regulatory paper work and the people to do it -- mostly to comply with federal, state and local environmental laws -- will rise almost 30% this year to $100,000. mr. gebhard adds that spending on environmental red tape amounts to between 6.5% and 7.5% of impco's total operating expenses. eastern reproduction corp., a waltham, mass., maker of thin metal precision parts, must report to five federal and state agencies as well as to local fire, police, hospital and plumbing authorities, says robert maguire, president. one state environmental regulator returned a report because "it wasn't heavy enough, it couldn't have been correct," mr. maguire says. withholding rules: employers must deposit withholding taxes exceeding $3,000 within three days after payroll -- or pay stiff penalties -- and that's a big problem for small businesses. it's especially nettlesome "if you're on the road and you're the one responsible," says eddie brown, president of brown capital management inc., a baltimore money-management firm. employee manuals: revising employee manuals on pensions, health care and other subjects costs over $25,000 a year for bert giguiere, president of professional agricultural management inc., a fresno, calif., provider of business services to farmers. an employer leaves itself open to a great deal of liability if its employee manuals don't reflect the most recent laws, he says. but the ever-changing laws are usually so complicated and confusing that "you need professionals to help you; you can't do it yourself," he adds. pension and profit-sharing rules: complying with these is enough to make business owners look forward to their own pension days. yearly changes in federal benefit laws force small businesses to repeatedly re-evaluate and redesign existing plans. alice fixx, who runs her own public-relations concern in new york, says she has had to overhaul her pension and profit-sharing plans three times in the past three years. "it doesn't increase benefits, but it's costly and time-consuming," ms. fixx says. compliance added 15% to 20% to her accounting bill last year, she says. sales tax records: advertising agencies and other service companies are exempt from city and state sales tax in most locales -- but the exemption comes at a price of exhaustive records and rigorous reviews. to justify their exempt status and avoid penalties, these businesses must show once a year that each and every transaction on which they didn't pay sales tax was a legitimate business expense. "you need one person to just take care of sales tax," says jennie tong, executive vice president of lee liu & tong advertising inc., new york.
when the trinity repertory theater named anne bogart its artistic director last spring, the nation's theatrical cognoscenti arched a collective eyebrow. ms. bogart, an acclaimed creator of deconstructed dramatic collages that tear into such sacred texts as rodgers and hammerstein's "south pacific," is decidedly downtown. trinity rep meanwhile is one of the nation's oldest and most respected regional theaters, still hosting an annual "a christmas carol." how would this bastion of traditional values fare in ms. bogart's iconoclastic hands? she held her fire with her first production at the trinity earlier this season. it was a predictable revival of her prize-winning off-broadway anthology of bertolt brecht's theoretical writings, called "no plays, no poetry." now, with the opening of maxim gorky's bourgeois-bashing "summerfolk," ms. bogart has laid her cards on the table. hers is a hand that will test the mettle of her audiences. for ms. bogart, who initially studied and directed in germany (and cites such european directors as peter stein, giorgio strehler and ariane mnouchkine as influences) tends to stage her productions with a brechtian rigor -- whether the text demands it or not. and gorky, considered the father of soviet socialist realism, did not write plays that easily lend themselves to deliberately antirealistic distancing techniques. gorky was a loyal if occasionally ambivalent proletarian writer committed to enlightening the masses with plain speaking rooted in a slightly sour version of chekhovian humanism. and "summerfolk," penned in 1904 as a kind of sequel to chekhov's "cherry orchard," is a lawn party of russian yuppies engaged in an exhausting ideological fight to the finish between the allrightniks and the reformers. along the way there also are lots of romantic dalliances. wisely ms. bogart has kept gorky's time and place intact. despite the absence of samovars (and a tendency to turn the furniture upside down), the production is rich in russian ennui voiced by languorous folk sporting beige linen and rumpled cotton, with boaters and fishing poles aplenty. but beyond this decorative nod to tradition, ms. bogart and company head off in a stylistic direction that all but transforms gorky's naturalistic drama into something akin to, well, farce. the director's attempt to force some brechtian distance between her actors and their characters frequently backfires with performances that are unduly mannered. not only do the actors stand outside their characters and make it clear they are at odds with them, but they often literally stand on their heads. like peter sellars, ms. bogart manipulates her actors as if they were rag dolls, sprawling them on staircases, dangling them off tables, even hanging them from precipices while having them perform some gymnastic feats of derring-do. there are moments in this "summerfolk" when the characters populating the vast multilevel country house (which looks like a parody of frank lloyd wright and is designed by victoria petrovich) spout philosophic bon mots with the self-conscious rat-a-tat-tat pacing of "laugh in." "talk hurts from where it spurts," one of them says. the clash of ideologies survives this treatment, but the nuance and richness of gorky's individual characters have vanished in the scuffle. as for the humor that gorky's text provides, when repainted in such broad strokes (particularly by the lesser members of the ensemble) it looks and sounds forced. ms. bogart does better with music than with words when she wants, as she so often does want, to express herself through gorky's helpless play. here she has the aid of her longtime associate jeff helpern, whom she appointed trinity's first-ever musical director and whom she equipped with a spanking new $60,000 sound system and recording studio. for gorky, mr. helpern provided an aural collage of debussy and rachmaninoff, which is less a score than a separate character with a distinct point of view. like brecht, and indeed ezra pound, ms. bogart has said that her intent in such manipulative staging of the classics is simply an attempt to "make it new." indeed, during a recent post-production audience discussion, the director explained that her fondest artistic wish was to find a way to play "somewhere over the rainbow" so that the song's "original beauty comes through," surmounting the cliche. the danger that ms. bogart seems to be courting here is one of obfuscation rather than rejuvenation, a vision so at odds with the playwright's that the two points of view nullify, rather than illuminate, each other. ms. bogart's cast is part and parcel of the problem. ed shea and barbara orson never find a real reason for their love affair as the foolish, idealistic young vass and the tirelessly humanitarian doctor maria lvovna. cynthia strickland as the long-suffering varvara is a tiresome whiner, not the inspirational counterrevolutionary gorky intended. better to look in the corners for performances that inspire or amuse. janice duclos, in addition to possessing one of the evening's more impressive vocal instruments, brings an unsuspected comedic touch to her role of olga, everybody's favorite mom. marni rice plays the maid with so much edge as to steal her two scenes. but it is the trinity rep newcomer, jonathan fried (zamislov, the paralegal) who is the actor to watch, whether he is hamming it up while conducting the chamber musicians or seducing his neighbor's wife (becca lish) by licking her bosom. ms. de vries writes frequently about theater.
(during its centennial year, the wall street journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of american business history.) morgan stanley, the once stodgy investment house, in 1974 helped a corporate client complete a hostile takeover. it was the start of a boom in unfriendly, even ungentlemanly, mergers. on july 18, 1974, international nickle of canada -- advised by morgan -- offered $28 a share, equal to $157 million, for esb, a philadelphia battery maker. esb said it was given only a three-hour advance warning on a "take it or leave it" basis from inco, as the toronto company is called. "esb is aware that a hostile tender offer is being made by a foreign company for all of esb's shares," said f.j. port, esb's president. "hostile" thus entered the merger-acquisition lexicon. joseph flom, of skadden, arps, slote, meagher & flom, which became a leading legal firm in merger cases, said the case "made takeovers respectable." esb spurned inco and within five days esb had a "white knight" as united aircraft -- headed by harry gray, a shrewdly friendly acquirer of companies -- offered $34 a share. gray was advised by goldman sachs and merrill lynch. esb directors warmly accepted, but a whirlwind bidding match ensued. within a few days in july, inco raised its bid to $36 and united matched it. on a single day inco lifted its offer to $38 and then to $41, equal to $225.5 million. united met the $38 but then withdrew. esb on july 29 accepted the inco offer and the brief battle -- unlike the intricate and lengthy big takeovers of 1984-1989 -- was over. the new gritty game became a money maker for wall street's once austere old-name houses. inco paid morgan an advisory fee of about $250,000, a paltry figure by today's measures. early this year morgan and three other investment houses each received $25 million in advisory fees from kohlberg kravis & roberts in its $25 billion friendly buy-out of rjr nabisco.
homefed corp. said third-quarter net income slid 14% to $23.9 million, or $1.10 per fully diluted share, from $27.9 million, or $1.21 a fully diluted share, because of increased bad assets and unexpected trouble in unloading foreclosed property. the decline surprised analysts and jolted homefed's stock, which lost 8.6% of its value, closing at $38.50 on the new york stock exchange, down $3.625. homefed had been one of the handful of large west coast thrifts that in recent quarters had counteracted interest-rate problems dogging the industry by keeping a lid on problem assets and lending heavily into the furious california housing market. analysts had been projecting fully diluted earnings in the third quarter in the range of about $1.30 a share. however, homefed's loan originations and purchases plunged 26% in the quarter, to $1.4 billion from $1.9 billion a year earlier. meanwhile, non-performing assets rose to $593 million from $518.7 million. some $380 million of the troubled assets is repossessed real estate, a 55.6% surge from the $244.2 million of repossesed property homefed held a year ago. homefed has $17.9 billion of assets. homefed said most of the troubled assets are apartment complexes, shopping malls and other commercial real estate. it said about half are in california, with the rest scattered across the country. it said sales of such properties were slower than anticipated in the third quarter, but it expects sales to pick up in the rest of the year. homefed said the slide in loan originations was more a matter of design than a sign of cooling in the california market. any such downturn in california would be grim news for west coast thrifts, particularly the less healthy ones, which have performed poorly even with a torrid market. but homefed said it purposely curbed loan originations in the quarter because of uncertainty over the new capital requirements and regulations that will emerge from negotiations over implementing the government's massive thrift bailout bill. it said its real-estate operations earned a record $21.7 million, more than double year-earlier real estate profit of $9 million. and analysts said they see no signs of an imminent swoon in california real estate, even with last week's earthquake. the thrift said earnings also were nicked in the quarter by a $4 million provision for losses associated with its previously reported plan to liquidate a real-estate franchise network. for the nine months, homefed earned $82.5 million, or $3.52 a fully diluted share, a 4.3% increase from year-earlier net income of $79.1 million, or $3.43 a fully diluted share.
yields on certificates of deposit at major banks were little changed in the latest week. the average yield on six-month cds of $50,000 and less slipped to 7.96% from 8.00%, according to banxquote money markets, an information service based here. on one-year cds of $50,000 and less, the average slid to 8.02% from 8.06%. both issues are among the most popular with individual investors. "because of shrinkage in the economy, rates can be expected to decline over a one-year horizon," said norberto mehl, chairman of banxquote. "it's unclear how much rates can fall and how soon." changes in cd yields in the week ended tuesday were in line with blips up and down within a fairly narrow range for the last two months. interest rates generally began declining last spring after moving steadily upward for more than a year. the average yield on small-denomination three-month cds moved up two-hundredths of a percentage point in the latest week to 7.85%. long-term cds declined just a fraction. the average yield on both two-year cds and five-year cds was 7.98%. only cds sold by major brokerage firms posted significant increases in average yields in the latest week, reflecting increased yields on treasury bills sold at monday's auction. the average yield on six-month broker-sold cds rose to 8.29% from 8.05% and on one-year cds the average yield rose to 8.30% from 8.09%. the brokerage firms, which negotiate rates with the banks and thrifts whose cds they sell, generally feel they have to offer clients more than they can get on t-bills or from banks and thrifts directly. t-bills sold at monday's auction yielded 7.90% for six months and 7.77% for three months, up from 7.82% and 7.61%, respectively, the week before. so-called jumbo cds, typically in denominations of $90,000 and up, also usually follow t-bills and interest rate trends in general more than those aimed at small investors. some jumbos posted fractional changes in average yields this week, both up and down. the average yield on threemonth jumbos rose to 8.00% from 7.96%, while the two-year average fell by the same amount to 7.89%. six-month and oneyear yields were unchanged, on average. "the (cd) market is unsettled right now," said banxquote's mr. mehl. "it's very easily influenced by changes in the stock market and the junk bond market." the small changes in averages reflect generally unchanged yields at many major banks. some, however, lowered yields significantly. at chase manhattan bank in new york, for example, the yield on a small denomination six-month cd fell about a quarter of a percentage point to 8.06%. in california, bank of america dropped the yield on both six-month and one-year "savings" cds to 8.33% from 8.61%. yields on money-market deposits were unchanged at an average 6.96% for $50,000 and less and down just a hundredth of a percentage point to 7.41% for jumbo deposits.
lion nathan ltd. agreed to buy the franchise to bottle, distribute and market pepsi-cola soft-drink products in australia, the company said. the new zealand brewing and retail concern didn't disclose terms. the agreement is effective jan. 1 and is subject to approval from australia's foreign investment review board. cadbury schweppes australia ltd. has held the australian pepsi franchise for the past four years. lion nathan and pepsicola australia, a unit of pepsico inc. of the u.s., didn't say why cadbury schweppes will no longer hold the franchise.
wang laboratories inc. has sold $25 million of assets and reached agreements in principle to sell an additional $187 million shortly, richard miller, president, said at the annual meeting. he said wang had reached an agreement with a "major financial firm" to sell for $150 million its domestic equipment lease portfolio and that of its wang credit corp. subsidiary. he said it also agreed to sell a portion of its european real estate unit for $37 million. mr. miller said that wang has already sold some $12 million of miscellaneous assets and disclosed that it had received $13 million from compaq computer corp., houston, in the previously announced sale of its stirling, scotland, plant. mr. miller repeated that in the next six months he plans to sell another $200 million to $300 million of assets to repay debt and reduce interest costs at wang, a minincomputer maker in lowell, mass. in response to questions after the annual meeting, mr. miller said the company is no longer looking for an equity investor. during the summer, wang executives had said they might seek outside investment.
safeway stores inc. reported a 69% decline in profit for the fiscal third quarter, but said operating improvements were masked by unusual gains in the year-earlier period. the oakland grocery retailer, closely held since a $4.2 billion leveraged buy-out in 1986, said profit for the three months ended sept. 9 was $7.1 million, compared with $23 million a year earlier. but it said the year-earlier results included gains of $23.5 million from divestitures. sales rose 4.2% to $3.31 billion from $3.2 billion. for the nine months, the company said profit fell 49% to $23.5 million from $46 million in the year-earlier quarter, which included divestiture-related gains of $50.6 million. sales increased 5.5% to $9.81 billion from $9.3 billion.
benjamin jacobson & sons has been the new york stock exchange specialist firm in charge of trading stock in ual corp. and its predecessors since the early 1930s. but the firm has never had a day like yesterday. at first ual didn't open because of an order imbalance. when it did a half-hour into the session, it was priced at $150 a share, down more than $28 from monday's close. it sank further to as low as $145, but a big rally developed in the last half hour, pushing the stock back up to close at $170, down just $8.375 from monday. in the process, 4.9 million shares traded, making ual the second most active issue on the big board. munching pizza when they could and yelling until their voices gave out, the two benjamin jacobson specialists at the big board's ual trading post yesterday presided over what can only be described as a financial free-for-all. "it was chaotic. but we like to call it 'controlled chaos, '" said 47-year-old robert j. jacobson jr., grandson of the firm's founder. he manned the ual post yesterday with christopher bates, 33, an energetic long islander who's a dead ringer for actor nicolas cage. who was doing all the selling? "options traders, arbitrage traders -- everyone," said mr. bates, cooling down with a carton of apple juice after the close yesterday. added mr. jacobson, "there were some pretty bad losses in the stock." big board traders said a 200,000-share buy order at $150 a share entered by bear, stearns & co., which was active in ual stock all day, is what set off the ual crowd in the late afternoon. a subsequent rally in ual helped the staggering stock market stage an astonishing recovery from an 80-point deficit to finish only slightly below monday's close. both jacobson traders, who had been hoping ual trading would get back to normal, read the news about the unraveling of ual takeover plans on the train into work yesterday morning. the news told them it would be a while longer before ual resumed trading like a regular airline stock after months of gyrations. when mr. jacobson walked into the office at 7:30 a.m. edt, he announced: "ok, buckle up." messrs. jacobson and bates walked on the big board floor at about 8:45 a.m. yesterday and immediately spotted trouble. already entered in the big board's computers and transmitted to their post were sell orders for 65,000 ual shares. the ual news had already caused a selling furor in the so-called third market, in which firms buy and sell stock away from the exchange floor. ual, which closed on the big board monday at $178.375 a share, traded in the third market afterward as low as $158 a share. there were rumors of $148-a-share trades. in the 45 minutes before the 9:30 opening bell, the jacobson specialists kept getting sell orders, heavier than they imagined. and at 9:15, they posted a $135 to $155 "first indication," or the price range in which the stock would probably open. that range was quickly narrowed to $145 to $155, although traders surrounding the post were told that $148 to $150 would be the likely target. when ual finally opened a half hour late, some 400,000 shares traded at $150. there was "selling pressure from everyone," said one trader. this month's friday-the-13th market plunge spurred by ual news wasn't as bad for the jacobson specialists as yesterday's action. on that earlier day, the stock's trading was halted at a critical time so the specialists could catch their breath. not yesterday. mr. jacobson, his gray hair flying, didn't wear out his red-white-and-blue sneakers, but he sweat so much he considered sending out for a new shirt. mr. bates usually handles day-to-day ual trading on his own. but yesterday, the heavy trading action eventually consumed not only messrs. jacobson and bates but four other jacobson partners, all doing their specialist-firm job of tugging buyers and sellers together and adjusting prices to accommodate the market. about 30 floor traders crammed near the ual post most of the day, and probably hundreds more came and went -- a "seething mass," as one trader described it. the 4.9 million-share volume flowing through the jacobson specialist operation was about five times normal for the stock. the heavy buying in the last half hour led the specialists to take special steps. the bear stearns order that marked the late-day turnaround caused a "massive buying effort" as ual jumped $20 a share to $170 in the last half hour, said mr. bates. with 15 seconds of trading to go, mr. jacobson, with what voice he had left, announced to the trading mob: "we're going to trade one price on the bell." that meant no trading would occur in the final seconds, as a way of making sure that last-second orders aren't subjected to a sudden price swing that would upset customers. about 11,000 shares sold at $170 on the bell, representing about eight to 10 late orders, the specialists estimate. big board traders praised the jacobson specialists for getting through yesterday without a trading halt. in chicago, a ual spokesman, "by way of policy," declined to comment on the company's stock or the specialists' performance. leaving the exchange at about 5 p.m., the jacobson specialists made no predictions about how trading might go today. said earl ellis, a jacobson partner who got involved in the ual action, "it all starts all over again" today.
britain's current account deficit dropped to #1.6 billion ($2.56 billion) in september from an adjusted #2 billion ($3.21 billion) the previous month, but the improvement comes amid increasing concern that a recession could strike the u.k. economy next year. the confederation of british industry's latest survey shows that business executives expect a pronounced slowdown, largely because of a 16-month series of interest-rate increases that has raised banks' base lending rates to 15%. "the outlook has deteriorated since the summer, with orders and employment falling and output at a standstill," said david wigglesworth, chairman of the industry group's economic committee. he also said investment by businesses is falling off. of 1,224 companies surveyed, 31% expect to cut spending on plant equipment and machinery, while only 28% plan to spend more. but despite mounting recession fears, government data don't yet show the economy grinding to a halt. unemployment, for example, has continued to decline, and the september trade figures showed increases in both imports and exports. as a result, prime minister margaret thatcher's government isn't currently expected to ease interest rates before next spring, if then. chancellor of the exchequer nigel lawson views the high rates as his chief weapon against inflation, which was ignited by tax cuts and loose credit policies in 1986 and 1987. officials fear that any loosening this year could rekindle inflation or further weaken the pound against other major currencies. fending off attacks on his economic policies in a house of commons debate yesterday, mr. lawson said inflation "remains the greatest threat to our economic well-being" and promised to take "whatever steps are needed" to choke it off. the latest government figures said retail prices in september were up 7.6% from a year earlier. many economists have started predicting a mild recession next year. david owen, u.k. economist with kleinwort benson group, reduced his growth forecast for 1990 to 0.7% from 1.2% and termed the risk of recession next year "quite high." but he said the downturn probably won't become a "major contraction" similar to those of 1974 and 1982. still, britain's current slump is a cause for concern here as the nation joins in the european community's plan to create a unified market by 1992. compared with the major economies on the continent, the u.k. faces both higher inflation and lower growth in the next several months. as a result, mr. owen warned, investment will be more likely to flow toward the other european economies and "the u.k. will be less prepared for the single market." britain's latest trade figures contained some positive news for the economy, such as a surge in the volume of exports, which were 8.5% higher than a year earlier. but while september exports rose to #8.43 billion, imports shot up to #10.37 billion. the resulting #1.9 billion merchandise trade deficit was partly offset by an assumed surplus of #300 million in so-called invisible items, which include income from investments, services and official transfers. despite the narrowing of the monthly trade gap, economists expect the current account deficit for all of 1989 to swell to about #20 billion from #14.6 billion in 1988. increasingly, economists say the big deficit reflects the slipping competitive position of british industry. "when the country gets wealthier, we tend to buy high-quality imports," mr. owen said.
vickers plc, a british aerospace, defense and automotive conglomerate, said it reached an agreed cash bid of #108.2 million ($173.3 million) for ross catherall group plc, a maker of specialty alloy and ceramics. the company said it expects to receive acceptances for its offer of 253 pence ($4.05) per share representing at least 67% of ross catherall's issued share capital, or 12.7 million ordinary shares. vickers said its offer also includes an option to receive a redeemable loan note in lieu of cash. the notes can be redeemed starting in july 1991. the company said its acquisition of ross catherall will be covered largely by cash raised in its july disposal of howson-algraphy for #241.7 million.
if bluebloods won't pay high prices for racehorses anymore, who will? breeders are betting on the common folk. the thoroughbred owners and breeders association, a lexington, ky.-based trade group, has launched "seminars" for "potential investors" at race tracks around the country. the group, which has held half a dozen seminars so far, also is considering promotional videos and perhaps a pitch to wall street investment bankers. "people in this business have been insulated," says josh pons, a horse breeder from bel air, md. "but the real future of this game is in a number of people owning a few horses." at the laurel race track, the breeders are romancing people like tim hulings, a beer packaging plant worker. right now, mr. hulings is waving his racing program, cheering for karnak on the nile, a sleek thoroughbred galloping down the home stretch. mr. hulings gloats that he sold all his stocks a week before the market plummeted 190 points on oct. 13, and he is using the money to help buy a 45-acre horse farm. "just imagine how exciting that would be if that's your horse," he says. but experts caution that this isn't a game for anyone with a weak stomach or wallet. "it's a big-risk business," warns charles c. mihalek, a lexington attorney and former kentucky state securities commissioner. "you have to go into it firmly believing that it's the kind of investment where you can lose everything." and many have done just that. consider spendthrift farm, a prominent lexington horse farm that went public in 1983 but hit hard times and filed for bankruptcy-court protection last year. a group of investors recently bought the remaining assets of spendthrift, hoping to rebuild it. other investors have lost millions in partnerships that bought thoroughbred racehorses or stallion breeding rights. one big problem has been the thoroughbred racehorse market. from 1974 to 1984, prices for the best yearlings at the summer sales rose 918% to an average of $544,681. since then, prices have slumped, to an average of $395,374 this summer. but that's for the best horses, with most selling for much less -- as little as $100 for some pedestrian thoroughbreds. even while they move outside their traditional tony circle, racehorse owners still try to capitalize on the elan of the sport. glossy brochures circulated at racetracks gush about the limelight of the winner's circle and high-society schmoozing. one handout promises: "pedigrees, parties, post times, parimutuels and pageantry." "it's just a matter of marketing and promoting ourselves," says headley bell, a fifth-generation horse breeder from lexington. maybe it's not that simple. for starters, racehorse buyers have to remember the basic problem of such ventures: these beasts don't come with warranties. and for every champion, there are plenty of nags. katherine voss, a veteran trainer at the laurel, md., track, offers neophytes a sobering tour of a horse barn, noting that only three of about a dozen horses have won sizable purses. one brown two-year-old filly was wheezing from a cold, while another had splints on its legs, keeping both animals from the racetrack. "you can see the highs and lows of the business all under one roof," she tells the group. "there aren't too many winners." perhaps the biggest hurdle owners face is convincing newcomers that this is a reputable business. some badly managed partnerships have burned investors, sometimes after they received advice from industry "consultants." so owners have developed a "code of ethics," outlining rules for consultants and agents, and disclosure of fees and any conflicts of interest. but some are skeptical of the code's effectiveness. "the industry is based on individual honesty," says cap hershey, a lexington horse farmer and one of the investors who bought spendthrift. despite the drop in prices for thoroughbreds, owning one still isn't cheap. at the low end, investors can spend $15,000 or more to own a racehorse in partnership with others. at a yearling sale, a buyer can go solo and get a horse for a few thousand dollars. but that means paying the horse's maintenance; on average, it costs $25,000 a year to raise a horse. for those looking for something between a minority stake and total ownership, the owners' group is considering a special sale where established horse breeders would sell a 50% stake in horses to newcomers.
buell industries inc. halved its quarterly dividend to five cents a share, payable nov. 17 to stock of record nov. 3. the company's quarterly dividend had been 10 cents a share since april 30, 1988. buell recently said it would incur an aftertax charge of about $3.6 million in its fourth quarter ending tuesday, in connection with the sale and discontinuance of several lines at a plant. the waterbury, conn., maker of industrial fasteners and metal stampings has 2.3 million shares outstanding.
dunkin' donuts inc., battling a takeover proposal by canada's dd acquisition corp., said that its directors will evaluate takeover offers submitted by nov. 10. dunkin' donuts, based in randolph, mass., previously said it would explore "alternatives, " including a leveraged buy-out of the company, but hadn't set a date for submission of proposals. dunkin' donuts chairman and chief executive robert m. rosenberg said "a sale is one alternative being considered," but he added the board hasn't decided whether to sell the doughnut franchiser. dd acquisition, jointly owned by unicorp canada corp. 's kingsbridge capital group unit and cara operations ltd., has made a $45-a-share tender offer valued at $268 million for dunkin' donuts. dunkin' donuts' announcement followed dd acquisition's request to the delaware court of chancery monday to set a trial date for its suit against the company. the trial had been postponed to allow dunkin' donuts to seek alternatives to dd acquisition's offer.
combustion engineering inc. said third-quarter net income of $22.8 million, reversing a $91.7 million year-earlier loss. the stamford, conn., power-generation products and services company said per-share earnings were 56 cents compared with the year-ago loss of $2.39. sales fell 1.5% to $884 million from $897.2 million. strong profit in the process industries, including chemical and pulp and paper, were offset by higher interest expense and by lower earnings as the company closed out certain long-term contracts. combustion reported improved profits in its automation and control products businesses, and it narrowed its losses in its public sector and environmental segment. power generation had higher sales but lower earnings; the company cited factors including work on certain low profit-margin contracts from previous years. net in the latest quarter included a pretax gain of $22.4 million from the sale of combustion's minority interest in stein industrie to gec alsthom n.v. of the netherlands. last year's results reflected a gain of $28.2 million on disposition of assets and a $165 million pretax provision mainly from costs of completing certain waste-to-energy and other power plants.
claude bebear, chairman and chief executive officer, of axa-midi assurances, pledged to retain employees and management of farmers group inc., including leo e. denlea jr., chairman and chief executive officer, if axa succeeds in acquiring farmers. mr. bebear added that the french insurer would keep farmers' headquarters in los angeles and "will not send french people to run the company." axa would also maintain farmers' relationships with the insurance exchanges that it manages. mr. bebear made his remarks at a breakfast meeting with reporters here yesterday as part of a tour in which he is trying to rally support in the u.s. for the proposed acquisition. the bid is part of sir james goldsmith's unfriendly takeover attempt for b.a.t industries plc, the british tobacco, retailing, paper and financial-services giant that acquired farmers last year for $5.2 billion. axa has agreed to acquire farmers from sir james's investment vehicle, hoylake investments ltd., for $4.5 billion plus a $1 billion investment in hoylake. any acquisition of farmers needs the approval of insurance commissioners in the nine states where farmers operates, and mr. bebear's trip will take him to idaho, arizona and new york after his stay here; he will meet with insurance regulators, legislators, industry excutives and the press. hearings on axa's acquisition application have been set for nov. 13 in idaho; nov. 20 in illinois; nov. 24 and dec. 4 in arizona; dec. 11 in washington state; and jan. 8 in oregon. hearings haven't yet been set in texas, ohio and kansas. california's insurance commissioner doesn't hold hearings on acquisition applications. although axa has been rebuffed by farmers and hasn't had any meetings with management, mr. bebear nonetheless appears to be trying to woo the company's executives with promises of autonomy and new-found authority under axa. he said mr. denlea would be a member of the top management team of the axa-midi group of companies, and would "help define policies and strategies of the group." farmers was quick yesterday to point out the many negative aspects it sees in having axa as its parent. for one, axa plans to do away with certain tax credits that have resulted in more than $600 million paid to the farmers exchanges during the past few years to offset underwriting losses. those credits result because of taxes that farmers, as the management company, has paid, and have "proved to be very important for the exchanges," a farmers spokesman said. mr. bebear contended that the tax cost to the exchanges under the revised structure would be about $8 million a year, which he described as "peanuts."
honeywell inc., minneapolis, said it completed its previously announced sale of 16% of the shares outstanding in its japanese joint venture, yamatake-honeywell, for $280 million. the stake was acquired by a group of 10 japanese financial institutions and industrial corporations, primarily insurance companies, honeywell said. proceeds will be used to repurchase as many as 10 million shares of honeywell stock, as previously announced. honeywell said a second sale of yamatake-honeywell is still being negotiated. the company, which now holds a 34% stake in the venture, has indicated that it intends to retain at least a 20% stake long term. a 20% stake would allow honeywell to include yamatake earnings in its results. a company spokesman said the gain on the sale couldn't be estimated until the "tax treatment has been determined."
oppenheimer capital limited partnership increased the quarterly distribution to 40 cents a limited partnership unit from 36.25 cents. the distribution represents available cash flow from the partnership between aug. 1 and oct. 31. it is payable nov. 30 to units of record oct. 31. the money manager is controlled 67.7% by its top officers and top officers of oppenheimer & co., a securities firm. both firms are in new york. oppenheimer capital has about 7.9 million limited partnership units outstanding. in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday, the units closed at $15.125, up 12.5 cents.
bank of montreal said it added 850 million canadian dollars (us$725.8 million) to its reserves against losses on third world loans, bringing the total it has set aside this year to c$1 billion. the bank said the c$1 billion in reserves will result in a charge of c$595 million against earnings but said it still expects to report a profit for the year ending tuesday. the bank reported net income of c$389 million for the nine months ended july 31. the bank said the increase in loan-loss provisions won't affect the payment of dividends. the bank said reserves now amount to 61% of its total less-developed-country exposure. excluding mexico, reserves equal 95% of ldc exposure. in toronto stock exchange trading, bank of montreal closed at c$33.25, up 87.5 canadian cents.
knight-ridder inc. said third-quarter earnings jumped 18%, partly because of the sale of two of its media properties. the media concern said net income rose to $37.8 million, or 72 cents a share, from $32 million, or 57 cents a share, in the year-earlier period. the latest results include a gain of $4.2 million, or eight cents a share, on the sale of television stations in oklahoma city and flint, mich. revenue increased 7.5% to $540.9 million from $503.1 million. robert f. singleton, knight-ridder's chief financial officer, said the company was "pleased" with its overall performance, despite only single-digit growth in newspaper revenue. that division's revenue rose 2.3% to $472.5 million from $461.9 million in the year-ago period. gains in advertising revenue, however, resulted in operating profit of $78.4 million -- up 20% from $65.6 million. in new york stock exchange composite trading, knight ridder closed at $51.50 a share, down 12.5 cents.
general electric co. executives and lawyers provided "misleading and false" information to the pentagon in 1985 in an effort to cover up "longstanding fraudulent" billing practices, federal prosecutors alleged in legal briefs. the government's startling allegations, filed only days before the scheduled start of a criminal overcharge trial against ge in philadelphia federal district court, challenge the motives and veracity of the nation's third-largest defense contractor. in a strongly worded response summarizing a filing made in the same court yesterday, ge asserted that "prosecutors have misstated the testimony of witnesses, distorted documents and ignored important facts." the company attacked the government's allegations as "reckless and baseless mudslinging," and said its management "promptly and accurately reported" to the pentagon all relevant information about billing practices. the case strikes at the corporate image of ge, which provides the military with everything from jet engines and electronic warfare equipment to highly classified design work on the strategic defense initiative, and could cause a loss of future defense contracts if pentagon and justice department officials take a tough stance. the company has been considered an industry leader in advocating cooperation and voluntary disclosures of improper or inflated billing practices. but the government now claims that a group of company managers and lawyers engaged in an elaborate strategy over five years to obscure from federal authorities the extent and details of "widespread" fraudulent billing practices. the problems were uncovered during a series of internal investigations of the company's space systems division, which has been the focus of two separate overcharge prosecutions by the government since 1985. the dispute stems from pretrial maneuvering in the pending court case, in which prosecutors have been demanding access to a host of internal company memos, reports and documents. last november, a federal grand jury indicted ge on charges of fraud and false claims in connection with an alleged scheme to defraud the army of $21 million on a logistics computer contract. the company, for its part, maintains that many of the disputed documents are privileged attorney-client communications that shouldn't be turned over to prosecutors. a hearing is scheduled on the issue today. the government's 136-page filing covers events leading up to the current case and an earlier indictment in march 1985, when ge was accused of defrauding the pentagon by illegally claiming cost overruns on minuteman missile contracts. ge pleaded guilty and paid a fine of more than $1 million in the minuteman case, which involved some of the same individuals and operations that are at the center of the dispute in the philadelphia court. in order to show that all of its units had corrected billing problems and therefore should become eligible again for new contracts, prosecutors contend that "high-level ge executives" and company lawyers provided "misleading statements" to then-air force secretary verne orr and other pentagon officials during a series of meetings in 1985. overall, the government contends that ge's disclosure efforts largely were intended to "curry favor" with pentagon officials without detailing the extent of the management lapses and allegedly pervasive billing irregularities uncovered by company investigations. prosecutors depict a company that allegedly sat on damaging evidence of overcharges from 1983 to 1985, despite warnings from an internal auditor. when ge finally disclosed the problems, prosecutors contend that mr. orr "was erroneously informed that the {suspected} practices had only just been discovered" by ge management. in its brief, the government asserted that it needs the internal ge documents to rebut anticipated efforts by ge during the trial to demonstrate "its good corporate character." ge, which was surprised by the last-minute subpoena for more than 100 boxes and file cabinets of documents, countered that senior ge managers didn't find out about questionable billing practices until 1985, and that the information was passed on quickly to mr. orr at his first meeting with company representatives. subsequent meetings, initiated after the company and two of its units were briefly suspended from federal contracts, were held to familiarize mr. orr with the company's self-policing procedures and to disclose additional information, according to ge. ge's filing contends that the billing practices at the heart of the current controversy involved technical disputes rather than criminal activity. the company's conduct "does not even raise a question of wrongful corporate intent, ratification or cover-up," ge's brief asserts. "on the contrary, it shows a corporation reacting swiftly and aggressively to very difficult issues in largely uncharted waters." mr. orr couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.
applied solar energy corp. of city of industry, calif., said it and its majority shareholder, american cyanamid co., signed a non-binding letter of intent for the acquisition of applied solar by mcdonnell douglas corp. for about $38 million. the proposed acquisition provides for a cash payment of $10 a share at closing and a contingent payment of as much as 80 cents a share placed in escrow. details of the escrow agreement haven't been completed, the companies said. there are 3.5 million shares of applied solar, of which american cyanamid owns 2.7 million. american cyanamid is a wayne, n.j., chemicals, drugs and fertilizer concern. completion of the acquisition is subject to execution of a definitive agreement, approval by all three companies' boards and the approval of applied solar's shareholders. an applied solar spokesman said completion is expected at the end of the year or early next year. a spokeswoman for the st. louis aerospace and defense concern said it wanted the acquistion because applied solar is involved in solar cells and solid-state laser components, and this fits with mcdonnell's business of laser applications for military space.
trading in cineplex odeon corp. shares was halted on the new york and toronto stock exchanges late yesterday afternoon at the company's request, toronto stock exchange officials said. brian hemming, a spokesman for the company's committee of independent directors, established in may to solicit and evaluate offers for the company, said it was expected to make an announcement early this morning. but mr. hemming said he wasn't aware of the nature of the talks under way between committee members and their advisers. cineplex traded on the new york stock exchange at $11.25 a share, up $1.125, before trading was halted. analysts have speculated in recent days that the value of offers received by the committee fell well short of what they had hoped, or even that the company's chairman, president and chief executive officer, garth drabinsky, is the only bidder for the company as a whole. the current effort to auction off the company was triggered by a dispute between mr. drabinsky and the toronto-based movie chain's major shareholder, mca inc.
london share prices closed sharply lower tuesday on the back of wall street's steep drop and renewed fears over u.k. economic fundamentals. tokyo's winning streak came to an end, and stocks fell in frankfurt and across europe as well. london's financial times 100-share index shed 40.4 points to finish at 2149.3. at london's close, the dow jones industrial average was 51.23 points lower at 2611.68. dealers said the initial pressure came from mildly disappointing u.k. trade figures for september and a worrisome report by the confederation of british industry that a decline in orders for manufactured goods is depressing both business optimism and investment plans for the coming year. the trade and cbi reports refocused attention on high interest rates and corporate profitability and helped rekindle underlying concerns over prospects for a recession in the u.k., dealers said. the 30-share index fell 33.3 points to 1739.3. volume was a modest 405.4 million shares traded, but better than the year's lowest turnover of 276.8 million monday. market watchers also noted an absence of institutional interest later in the session helped pave the way for broader declines when wall street opened weaker. they added that market-makers were knocking share prices down in midafternoon in a bid to attract some interest, but the action largely helped open the way for london's late declines. insurance stocks provided some early support to the market, partly on favorable brokerage recommendatons and talk of continental european interest in british life and composite insurers. british life insurer london & general, which firmed 2 pence to 356 pence ($5.70), and composite insurer royal insurance, which finished 13 lower at 475, were featured in the talk. on the life insurance side, pearl group finished 5 lower at 640, and sun life dropped 15 to #11.53. jaguar finished 4 lower at 694. dealers said the market didn't react substantially to ford motor co. 's disclosure to the u.s. securities and exchange commission that it will seek 100% of jaguar's shares outstanding when u.k. government share regulations are lifted at the end of next year. tokyo stocks closed easier, posting their first loss in six trading days, partly because of programmed index-linked selling by trust investment funds in the afternoon session. the nikkei index fell 58.97 points to 35526.55. the index gained 99.14 points monday. in early trading in tokyo wednesday, the nikkei index rose 17.92 points to 35544.47. on tuesday, the tokyo stock price index of all first section issues was down 6.31 at 2681.22. first section volume was estimated at 900 million shares, up from 605 million monday. observers said the market again failed to find a trading focus, discouraging much participation by investors. the market, however, is expected to remain stable and expectations for future gains are high, traders said. such sentiment is being supported by word that a large amount of cash from investment trust funds is scheduled to enter the market later this week and in early november. the expected amount is said to be 700 billion yen ($4.93 billion) to 1.05 trillion yen -- the second largest amount this year in a given period, following the record high set at the end of july, according to market observers. in addition to a large amount of investment trust fund cash, analysts generally see the market environment improving compared with the past couple of weeks. toshiyuki nishimura, an analyst at yamaichi securities, said, "the market sentiment is bullish, simply because there are few bad factors." buying activity tuesday centered on a wide range of midcapitalization, domestic demand-related shares whose prices range from 1,000 to 2,000 yen. investors expect these shares will be targets of investment trust funds, which often buy small amounts spread across a wide range of issues. on the other hand, high-priced shares such as pioneer electronic and sony failed to spark investor interest because these issues are unlikely to be bought by investment trust funds, observers said. tuesday's notable losers were highpriced shares such as pioneer, which shed 210 yen to 5,900 yen. sony was down 130 to 8,590. tdk fell 120 to 5,960, fuji photo film declined 160 to 4,830, and fanuc dropped 160 to 7,440. share prices on the frankfurt stock exchange closed sharply lower in thin dealings as worried investors remained idle as the result of two potentially destabilizing domestic developments. the dax index fell 15.85 to end at 1507.37. cutting against the downward trend was continental, which jumped 4 marks to 346 marks ($187) in heavy trading on rumors that the tire maker is about to be taken over. it jumped 7.5 monday. traders said the market was exceptionally thin, as small investors remain on the sidelines. market participants say investors are not only licking their wounds following the turbulence last week, but they have also been made nervous by two events in west germany. on sunday, the governing christian democratic union suffered a series of setbacks, the extent of which became fully known only late monday, in municipal elections in baden-wuerttemberg. traders say investors are worried that the cdu won't be able to hold office in federal elections at the end of 1990. and statements by the chairman of the ig metall labor union, franz steinkuehler, also cast a cloud over trading, dealers said. mr. steinkuehler said at a convention in west berlin that the union has to prepare for "a big fight" to achieve its main goal of a 35-hour workweek, down from current 37-hour workweek. the decline in prices cut broadly through the blue-chip issues, as siemens tumbled 7.5 to 544, deutsche bank plunged 7 to 657, and the auto makers fell sharply as well. daimler-benz dropped 12.5 to 710.5, bayerische motoren werke dropped 10.5 to 543.5, and volkswagen lost 7.1. elsewhere, share prices closed lower in zurich, amsterdam, milan and stockholm. uneasiness about wall street was cited in several markets. prices closed lower in sydney, singapore and wellington, were mixed in hong kong and higher in taipei, manila, paris, brussels and seoul. here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by morgan stanley capital international perspective, geneva. to make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100. the percentage change is since year-end.
directors of bergen bank and den norske creditbank, two of norway's leading banks, announced they had agreed to the formal merger of the banks. the merger would create scandinavia's seventh largest bank, with combined assets of 210 billion norwegian kroner ($30.3 billion). the banks said an application for a concession to merge into one entity to be called den norske bank as was sent monday to the finance ministry. the two boards said in a joint statement that the proposed merger agreement was considered in separate board meetings in oslo monday. they said the agreement will be submitted to their respective supervisory boards next wednesday. extraordinary general meetings, to be held nov. 28, will decide the share exchange ratio. the merger requires the approval of norwegian authorities.
time warner inc. is considering a legal challenge to tele-communications inc. 's plan to buy half of showtime networks inc., a move that could lead to all-out war between the cable industry's two most powerful players. time is also fighting the transaction on other fronts, by attempting to discourage other cable operators from joining tele-communications as investors in showtime, cable-tv industry executives say. time officials declined to comment. last week, tele-communications agreed to pay viacom inc. $225 million for a 50% stake in its showtime subsidiary, which is a distant second to time's home box office in the delivery of pay-tv networks to cable subscribers. tele-communications, the u.s.'s largest cable company, said it may seek other cable partners to join in its investment. tele-communications is hbo's largest customer, and the two have a number of other business relationships. earlier this year, time even discussed bringing tele-communications in as an investor in hbo, executives at both companies said. the purchase of the showtime stake is "a direct slap in our face," said one senior time executive. time is expected to mount a legal challenge in u.s. district court in new york, where viacom in may filed a $2.5 billion antitrust suit charging time and hbo with monopolizing the pay-tv business and trying to crush competition from showtime. executives involved in plotting time's defense say it is now preparing a countersuit naming both viacom and tele-communications as defendants. the executives say time may seek to break up the transaction after it is consummated, or may seek constraints that would prevent tele-communications from dropping hbo in any of its cable systems in favor of showtime. viacom officials declined to comment. jerome kern, tele-communications' chief outside counsel, said he wasn't aware of time's legal plans. but he said that any effort by time to characterize the tele-communications investment in showtime as anti-competitive would be "the pot calling the kettle black." "it's hard to see how an investment by the largest {cable operator} in the weaker of the two networks is anti-competitive, when the stronger of the two networks is owned by the second largest" cable operator, mr. kern said. in addition to owning hbo, with 22 million subscribers, time warner separately operates cable-tv system serving about 5.6 million cable-tv subscribers. tele-communications controls close to 12 million cable subscribers, and viacom has about one million. in its suit against time, viacom says the ownership of both cable systems and cable-programming networks gives the company too much market power. time argues that in joining up with tele-communications, viacom has potentially more power, particularly since viacom also owns cable networks mtv, vh-1 and nick at nite. ironically, tele-communications and time have often worked closely in the cable business. together, they control nearly 40% of turner broadcasting systems inc.; tele-communications has a 21.8% stake, while time warner has a 17.8% stake. but since time's merger with warner communications inc., relations between the two have become strained. each company worries that the other is becoming too powerful and too vertically integrated. meanwhile, some legal observers say the tele-communications investment and other developments are weakening viacom's antitrust suit against time. viacom accuses time in its suit of refusing to carry showtime or a sister service, the movie channel, on time's manhattan cable tv system, one of the nation's largest urban systems. but yesterday, manhattan cable announced it will launch showtime on nov. 1 to over 230,000 subscribers. showtime has also accused hbo of locking up the lion's share of hollywood's movies by signing exclusive contracts with all the major studios. but showtime has continued to sign new contracts with hollywood studios, and yesterday announced it will buy movies from columbia pictures entertainment inc., which currently has a non-exclusive arrangement with hbo.
the federal trade commission said it authorized its staff to seek a preliminary injunction barring imo industries inc. from acquiring the shares outstanding of the u.s. unit of the british company, united scientific holdings plc, for $69 million. the ftc said it "had reason to believe that the proposed acquisition could substantially reduce competition" in the production of certain image intensifier tubes, which are important components of night-vision devices sold primarily to the defense industry. the ftc said it would seek to enjoin the proposed acquisition in a federal trial court, but declined to specify which one. under federal law, if the court grants a preliminary injunction, the ftc must begin administrative proceedings to determine the legality of the proposed stock purchase within 20 days. officials at the united scientific unit, optic-electronic corp. of garland, texas, and at imo industries of lawrenceville, n.j., couldn't be reached for comment.
the airline industry's fortunes, in dazzling shape for most of the year, have taken a sudden turn for the worse in the past few weeks. citing rising fuel costs, promotional fare cuts and a general slowdown in travel, several major carriers have posted or are expected to post relatively poor third-quarter results. yesterday, usair group inc., recently one of the industry's stellar performers, posted a worse-than-expected $77.7 million net loss for the period. so far, the industry's fourth quarter isn't looking too strong either, prompting many analysts to slash earning projections for the rest of the year by as much as one-fourth. and they say the outlook for 1990 is nearly as bad. airlines in 1989 "came in like a bang and are going out like a whimper," said kevin murphy, an airline analyst at morgan stanley & co. this turn of events has put a big damper on an industry that seemed almost invincible last spring, when fares were rising at double-digit rates and many carriers seemed to be growing fat on near-monopolies in certain markets. now, many airline companies might become a lot less attractive as takeover targets on wall street. the downturn also raises questions about the carriers' ambitious orders for new airplanes, which currently total $32.5 billion over the next three years. for travelers, though, the industry's problems have had some positive effects. in recent weeks, airlines have cut numerous fares in leisure markets to try to win back customers. others have tried to spruce up frequent-flier programs. previously, airlines were limiting the programs because they were becoming too expensive. just last week, for example, trans world airlines and pan am corp. 's pan american world airways went so far as to offer cash rebates or gift checks of $200 to $1,000 to certain frequent-flier members making trans-atlantic flights in business class or first class. the industry's slowdown became apparent this month when amr corp., parent of american airlines, reported an 8.8% drop in third-quarter net income and said its fourth quarter would be "disappointing." shortly before that, usair had said its third-quarter results would be "significantly lower" than a year earlier. yesterday, it provided the details: its loss of $77.7 million, or $1.86 a share, contrasted with net of $68.5 million, or $1.58 a share, in the 1988 third quarter. revenue rose only 3.3% in the latest period, to $1.53 billion from $1.48 billion. for the nine months, the arlington, va., company's net plunged 73% to $38.5 million, or 76 cents a share, from $142.2 million, or $3.28 a share. revenue rose 12% to $4.75 billion from $4.22 billion. the results surprised many analysts, because usair has almost no competition in its pittsburgh hub and has expanded operations by completing its acquisition of piedmont airlines. shortly after announcing its quarterly loss, usair's stock tumbled $3 a share. it ended at $40.125, down $2.375, in new york stock exchange composite trading. "nobody was expecting this size of a loss," said paul karos, an analyst with first boston corp. one airline executive, who declined to be identified, called the loss "amazing." in announcing the results, usair cited many of the same problems that several other industry officials have named recently. it said the industry's domestic traffic was flat in the third quarter; analysts say this was because hefty fare increases earlier in the year scared off many leisure travelers this summer. to try to combat the traffic slowdown, airlines started reducing fares; average fares rose only 1.7% in august, in contrast to increases of 16% each in february and march. but so far, the effort has failed, and traffic is still slow. some other fare promotions have backfired. this summer, the industry introduced a "kids fly free" program, in which children were allowed to fly free if they were traveling with an adult. airlines tried to restrict the program substantially by limiting the offer to certain days of the week, but it still was apparently used far more heavily than the airlines expected. airlines also say their frequent-flier programs are squeezing profits because awards are being redeemed at a heavier-than-normal rate. one airline official said about three times as many free-travel coupons are being turned in as in previous years -- not surprisingly, as the airlines last year allowed many travelers to build up mileage at triple the normal rate. rising operating expenses are another problem. fuel costs were up 10% in the third quarter. labor costs, which leveled off in the past few years because of lower pay scales for newer employees, are on the upswing again at many carriers. and some carriers are facing other unexpected headaches: usair, for example, blamed some of its loss on merger expenses and on disruptions caused by hurricane hugo last month. "we cannot quantify the total adverse effects of hugo," said edwin colodny, chairman and president of usair group. whatever the cause for the downturn, few people are predicting any sudden improvement. airline economics inc., an aviation consulting firm, is projecting an industrywide operating profit of $2.5 billion for 1989, compared with earlier forecasts of $3 billion to $3.5 billion. as for 1990, the firm predicts that profit will slip to between $1 billion and $1.5 billion.
good grief! charlie brown is selling out. those metropolitan life ads were bad enough. but now, charlie brown is about to start pitching everything from chex party mix to light bulbs. why is he cashing in now? turns out that next year, charlie brown, snoopy and the gang turn 40 -- and scripps howard's united media unit, the syndicator and licensing agent for charles schulz's comic strip, sees a bonanza in licensing the cartoon characters to a bevy of advertisers for ads, tie-ins and promotions. "peanuts has become a major part of american culture," says peter shore, united media's vice president of marketing and licensing. the comic strip "has a magical, everlasting quality about it. our plan is to honor charles schulz and the strip all year long." the effort will make the peanuts gang very familiar pitchmen in 1990. general electric plans to use the characters to plug its miser light bulb. teleflora will run tv ads at valentine's day promoting its "snoopy's love bouquet." ralston purina will promote its chex party mix's three new flavor packets named for charlie brown, lucy and linus. the characters will also be featured in a new public service effort for the united way. beyond the advertisements, the syndicator is planning a traveling arena show, new tv specials for cbs and even an exhibit at the smithsonian institute. the yearlong schedule of festivities will be kicked off officially with a combination live and animation half-time special at the super bowl in january. all the tie-ins, though, have some marketing experts questioning whether the party may go too far. "there are too many people participating," says al ries, of trout & ries, a greenwich, conn., marketing consulting firm. "if you want to cut through the clutter, you have to make your message as distinct, sharp and individual as possible. sharing a character with other advertisers isn't a way to do that." but united media says it's very scrupulous with the contracts it hands out. "we're not interested in promoting every single product that comes along," mr. shore says. metropolitan life ad executives couldn't be reached about the use of the peanuts characters by others. but mr. shore says that company's exclusive advertising rights extend only to the insurance and financial services category. berry rejoins wpp group norman berry, the creative executive who was apparently squeezed out of ogilvy & mather in june, is returning to ogilvy's parent company, wpp group plc. mr. berry, 58, had resigned after being asked by ogilvy 's chairman and chief executive officer, kenneth roman, to give up his title as creative head of the new york office and to take a fuzzier international role. yesterday, just a day after mr. roman announced he would leave to take a top post at american express, wpp said mr. berry would return to take an international role at the parent company. mr. berry said the timing was a coincidence and that his decision was unrelated to mr. roman's departure. rjr taps fcb/leber rjr nabisco inc. awarded its national broadcast media-buying assignment to fcb/leber katz partners, the new york outpost of chicago-based foote, cone & belding. the naming of fcb/leber katz partners as agency of record for nabisco brands inc. and planters lifesavers co. follows rjr nabisco's announcement last week that it will disband its rjr nabisco broadcast division and dismiss its 14 employees dec. 1. to cut costs. new york-based rjr nabisco wouldn't say what it spends annually, but industry executives say it will spend more than $140 million this year, down from about $200 million last year. ad notes. . . . earnings: interpublic group of cos. said third-quarter net rose 15% to $6.9 million, or 21 cents a share, from $6 million, or 18 cents a share, in the year-earlier period. revenue increased more than 5% to $283.2 million from $268.6 million. holiday promotion: pepsico inc. will give away 4,000 sets of "game boy," nintendo's new hand-held video game in a two-month promotion scheduled to begin nov. 1. pepsi said it will spend $10 million advertising the promotion.
international business machines corp. agreed to acquire a 15% stake in paxus corp., an australian computer-software and information-services concern, for 20 million australian dollars (us$17 million). the investment will be made through ibm australia ltd., a unit of ibm, the two companies said yesterday. ibm can raise its stake in paxus to 20% over three years, but agreed to not go beyond 20% in that time. paxus said in a statement it has several "well developed product and services relationships" with the u.s. computer company, and plans to expand these links. the company earns about half its revenue overseas and plans further expansion. a majority stake in paxus currently held by nzi corp. will be diluted to slightly less than 50% after ibm acquires its interest. the agreement requires approval from australia's foreign investment review board and national companies and securities commission, and from shareholders of paxus.
bond corp. holdings ltd. 's consolidated debt totals 6.9 billion australian dollars (us$5.32 billion), including a$1.6 billion of bonds convertible into shares. alan bond, chairman and controlling shareholder of the cash-strapped australian media, brewing, resources and property concern, disclosed the debt figures yesterday. the disclosure follows last friday's news that bond corp. incurred an overall loss of a$980.2 million for the fiscal year ended june 30, the largest loss in australian corporate history. the debt load would have been higher but for a reduction of a$5 billion over the past year from asset sales, mr. bond said at a business gathering. mr. bond indicated the consolidated debt figures, which include debt of units such as bell group ltd., will be published soon in bond corp. 's 1989 annual accounts. he predicted the debt will be reduced by another a$3.8 billion this fiscal year ending june 30, 1990, but didn't explain how this will be achieved. mr. bond blamed rising australian interest rates and the acquisition of bell group "with its very high levels of shortterm debt" for producing a condition "that was no longer sustainable. "in order to restore confidence and ensure the support of our principal lenders," mr. bond said, "we embarked on fundamantal changes in the structure and direction of the group." that reassessment resulted in continuing asset sales, as well as write-offs exceeding a$1.1 billion last fiscal year. "in essence we have made a decision to clear the decks," mr. bond told the meeting. while some assets have been written down, others are undervalued in the accounts, mr. bond maintained. among these are the company's australian brewing assets, in the books at a$950 million but actually worth a$2.5 billion, he said. an investment in chile's telephone company is carried at us$300 million but really worth us$500 million, and the company's property portfolio is undervalued by at least a$250 million, mr. bond said. mr. bond forecast that by next june, "what will emerge will be a company with a honed sense of purpose . . . a stable balance sheet, with good-quality assets in brewing, telecommunications, media and property." he didn't name energy resources in that list, signaling that all the company's coal and oil interests might be for sale in total or in part. some of the oil interests already have been sold.
mercedes-benz of north america inc., grosse pointe shores, mich., estimated it will sell about as many cars in 1990 as the 75,000 it expects to deliver this year. mercedes officials said they expect flat sales next year even though they see the u.s. luxury-car market expanding slightly. erich krampe, president of the u.s. sales arm of west german auto maker daimler benz ag, predicted luxury-car sales will rise to 840,000 in 1990 from 830,000 this year primarily because of the new japanese makes. most of the growth, he said, will come in the $35,000-to-$50,000 price range, where mercedes has a 35% u.s. market share. mercedes sold 82,348 cars in 1988. mr. krampe also said that mercedes plans to bring out new models every year through the mid-1990s and it will shorten its product development cycle to eight years from 10 or 12 years to compete more effectively with toyota motor corp. 's lexus, nissan motor co. 's infiniti and honda motor co. 's acura luxury-car divisions.
the treasury plans to raise $1.8 billion in new cash with the sale monday of about $15.6 billion in short-term bills to redeem $13.81 billion in maturing bills. the offering will be divided evenly between 13-week and 26-week bills maturing feb. 1, 1990, and may 3, 1990, respectively. tenders for the bills, available in minimum $10,000 denominations, must be received by 1 p.m. est monday at the treasury or at federal reserve banks or branches. the treasury said it will alter the auctions unless it has assurance of enactment of legislation to raise the statutory debt limit before the scheduled auctions monday.
apogee enterprises inc. said profit for the third quarter ending dec. 2 will fall below the year-earlier results because of an after-tax charge of $1.9 million related to a project that was guaranteed by the company. a year ago, the minneapolis glass products and aluminum window maker earned $4 million, or 30 cents a share, on revenue of $114 million. apogee said the charge stems from a building supply contract in which the company guaranteed a contractor's performance. apogee said a subcontractor had severe cost overruns and was unable to fulfill the contract terms on its own, making it necessary for apogee to advance cash to ensure completion of the project. the company said its core businesses have performed well and it expects them to continue to do so in the remainder of the fiscal year.
randolph w. mcelroy, a vice chairman of this bank-holding company, was named to the additional position of chairman of its principal unit, sovran bank. mr. mcelroy, 54 years old, will remain president and chief executive officer of the unit. sovran also named john b. werner a vice chairman of the parent company and the unit and elected him to the newly created position of chief credit officer of sovran financial, increasing the number of corporate board members to 35. mr. werner, 58, was formerly senior executive vice president of the parent company and the unit.
moody's investors service inc. said it lowered the debt ratings of certain long-term debt held by this company. the debt-rating concern cited the bank's move into the texas market, noting its profitability and capital adequacy measurements will be depressed relative to the bank's past performance. moody's also said it raised its rating on the deposit insurance bridge bank, now known as bank one, texas n.a., reflecting the support of other banking affiliates and substantial assistance for the fdic. officials at the new york bank-holding company weren't available for comment on the debt-rating changes.
at lloyd's of london, underwriters still scratch out policies using fountain pens and blotting paper. visitors are ushered into the premises by red-frocked doormen known as waiters, a reminder of the insurance market's origins in a coffeehouse in 17th century london. such trappings suggest a glorious past but give no hint of a troubled present. lloyd's, once a pillar of the world insurance market, is being shaken to its very foundation. the 301-year-old exchange is battered by enormous claims from a decade-long run of unprecedented disasters, the most recent of which is last week's earthquake in california's bay area. at the same time, lloyd's is besieged by disgruntled investors and hamstrung by inefficient but time-honored ways of conducting business. the exchange is gradually being squeezed into narrow, less-profitable segments of the market by less hidebound competitors. "lloyd's is on the ropes," says peter nutting, a lloyd's investor for 17 years who now leads a dissident group threatening to sue exchange underwriters for alleged mismanagement and negligence. "it needs more discipline. it needs to sort itself out." most troublesome is the shrinking pool of "names," the well-heeled investors (some of them royal) who, as members of about 360 syndicates, underwrite policies. some 1,750 members quit the exchange last year, more than triple the number of resignations in 1987. names are resigning at an even faster pace this year. lackluster returns are one reason. the average after-tax return on investment in 1986, the most recent year for which results are available, was 6.5%, according to chatset ltd., an insurance consulting firm in london. in 1985, it was 2.1%. between 1981 and 1986, the most recent five-year period for which figures are available, lloyd's reported over #3.6 billion in claims and reserves against future losses ($5.7 billion at today's exchange rates), more than double the #1.35 billion posted in the previous five-year period. many of the 31,329 investors who remain are beginning to question one of the exchange's most basic tenets, the concept of unlimited personal liability. investors may reap huge profits when premiums exceed claims, but they are liable to their last pound or dollar in the event of a catastrophe. and catastrophes are getting ever more costly. lloyd's claims for the 1988 piper alpha oil-rig disaster in the north sea, for instance, may reach $1 billion. during the five-year period ended 1986, roughly 80% of the names had money tied up in money-losing syndicates, according to chatset consultants. the peril of unlimited liability looms large for a number of them now. "i have wished i could die and be out of it -- that's how bad it is," betty atkins, a secretary from suburban london, says. ms. atkins, whose lloyd's membership was a bonus from a former employer in 1981, belongs to mr. nutting's dissident group on the outhwaite syndicate, which has been hard hit by asbestos reinsurance claims. ms. atkins, who underwrote #20,000, or about $32,000, of insurance coverage on that syndicate, now faces potential losses of roughly #70,000, or $111,000. "if lloyd's wants #70,000 out of me they will have to take everything i've got -- and even then i don't know if it will be enough," she says. unease is widespread among exchange members. "i can't think of any reason to join lloyd's now," says keith whitten, a british businessman and a lloyd's member since 1979. "the downside is very considerable, and at the moment the upside is very marginal." if profits don't improve, mr. whitten says he may quit the exchange. meanwhile, competition from rivals unencumbered by history is intensifying. lloyd's is being squeezed out of low-margin but more consistently profitable product lines such as primary property and marine insurance. over the past decade, competitors have chipped away at the exchange's share of the #2.5 billion marine market in london, where half the world's ships are insured. lloyd's 66% stake in that market has shrunk to 50% in that period, according to an official at the institute of london underwriters, a lloyd's competitor. (the official asked not to be named.) much of the business has gone to the institute, an association of more than 100 insurers, including cigna corp., allianz versicherungs ag of west germany and britain's commercial union assurance plc. lloyd's has endured decades of genteel decline. at the peak of its power and influence a century ago, lloyd's dominated the insurance world with a 50% stake. it virtually dictated how ships were to be built and it monitored commerce through a unrivaled intelligence network in ports around the globe. today, lloyd's share of the world market, excluding life insurance, is about 2%. (its stake is even smaller if life insurance is included.) bigger rivals, such as aetna and allianz, backed by armies of statisticians using computers in hundreds of branches, operate more efficiently and often can offer lower rates, brokers say. though lloyd's pioneered such now-standard policies as worker's compensation insurance, burglary insurance for homeowners and businesses, and bankers' liability insurance, competitors now underwrite most of that business. beyond that, many big oil, chemical and airline companies are siphoning off big chunks of the market by insuring themselves through "captive" offshore companies for industry-specific coverage. even lloyd's specialty -- unusually risky ventures -- is being challenged. only 10 years ago, for instance, lloyd's was the pre-eminent insurer of thoroughbred horses. but since 1981, kirk horse insurance inc. of lexington, ky. has grabbed a 20% stake of the market. ronald kirk, president, says lloyd's has suffered because its structure doesn't allow underwriters to deal directly with clients; brokers are required intermediaries. thus, he asserts, lloyd's can't react quickly to competition. "lloyd's has lost control of the situation," he says. "they aren't controlling their destiny like they used to." murray lawrence, lloyd's chairman, agrees the exchange faces big challenges. "this is a watershed time, and we are trying to plot our way ahead," he says. "we have been a great market for inventing risks which other people then take, copy and cut rates." lloyd's, he says, is cut off from "the vast body of premium down at the bottom end which acts as a steadying influence" against catastrophic losses. by that, he means low-margin but low-risk products such as certain types of primary property insurance. the exchange, he says, must find new products and new markets. that won't be an easy task. tradition is dictator at lloyd's. three years ago, the exchange took up residence in a space-age tower of steel and glass -- evocative of the kind of modern architecture that britain's prince charles has denounced. (some exchange wags call the building "the oil rig.") but along with such treasured artifacts as lord nelson's spyglass, lloyd's also brought its outmoded ways of doing business. the lloyd's market actively underwrites insurance just 4 1/2 hours a day, brokers say. underwriting doesn't get under way until after morning tea at 10 a.m. a two-hour lunch break follows. things wind down at about 4:30 p.m., just in time for afternoon tea. lloyd's vast trading hall houses a warren of well-polished desks. the hall's few computers are used mostly to send messages. sandwiched between desks, underwriters sit on benches surrounded by stacks of policies. brokers clutching thick folders stand in lines, waiting their turn to speak to the underwriters. a broker may have to approach as many as 20 underwriters who insure the endeavors on behalf of the syndicates. it could take six months for a claim to be paid. "the system," says nicholas samengo-turner, a lloyd's broker who left the exchange in 1985, "is so ludicrously unprofessional it drives you mad." some maintain underwriters also have been inept. john wetherell, a lloyd's underwriter, says he and his fellow underwriters underestimated by as much as 50% the premiums they should have charged for property risks from 1980 to 1985. "how unprofessional we must have appeared to the outside world -- how incompetent at risk assessment and evaluation," he says. lloyd's officials decline to comment on the matter. more recently, property rates have increased. many at lloyd's expect the san francisco earthquake will cause the industry to boost rates even further. but it will be years before it is clear whether higher rates will offset the payouts for such disasters. the magnitude of the exchange's problems may not become known for some time because of lloyd's practice of leaving the books open for three years to allow for the settlement of claims. lloyd's only recently reported its financial results for 1986. that year, it posted record pretax profit of #650 million, a gain it attributes to higher rates and fewer claims. but mr. lawrence says reported profit will be down in 1987, 1988 and 1989, though he declines to specify how steep the decline will be. insurance analysts say the exchange's downturn in profitability is likely to be aggravated by more than $600 million in aviation losses (including the 1988 pan am airline disaster over lockerbie, scotland) and a still-uncalculated chunk of claims from september's hurricane hugo. lloyd's says the departures of names isn't likely to hurt its underwriting capacity, currently about #11 billion. mr. lawrence says the drain of funds has been offset by an increase in investments by the remaining names. meanwhile, the exchange has been trying to lower costs. (it recently cut its work force by 9%, or 213.) but lloyd's is hampered in its efforts to overhaul operations by its reluctance to embrace modern technology. mr. wetherell, the underwriter, reckons half of his business could be transacted by computer, cutting costs at least 10%. though lloyd's has talked for years about computerizing underwriting transactions, the effort hasn't gotten very far. competition among underwriters and brokers makes them loath to centralize price and policy information. both groups cling to traditional face-to-face dealings, even for routine policies. lloyd's overblown bureaucracy also hampers efforts to update marketing strategies. some underwriters have been pressing for years to tap the low-margin business by selling some policies directly to consumers. lloyd's presently sells only auto insurance directly to the public, and such policies are sold only in limited markets such as the u.k. and canada. but such changes must be cleared by four internal committees and dozens of underwriters, brokers and administrators before being implemented. the proposal to sell directly to the public remains mired in bureaucratic quicksand. lloyd's is moving forward on some fronts, though. mr. lawrence says the exchange is updating some procedures to make speedier payments on claims. by next year, all underwriters will be linked to a communications network that could reduce paper work on claims.
japan's daiwa securities co. named masahiro dozen president. mr. dozen succeeds sadakane doi, who will become vice chairman. yoshitoki chino retains his title of chairman of daiwa, japan's second-largest securities firm. in japanese firms, the president usually is in charge of day-to-day operations, while the chairman's role is more a ceremonial one. the title of chief executive officer isn't used. while people within daiwa, particularly internationalists, expected that mr. dozen, 52, would eventually become daiwa's president, the speed of his promotion surprised many. it was only earlier this year that the jovial, easygoing executive -- he likes to joke with americans about how his name is synonymous with twelve -- was appointed deputy president. mr. dozen is taking over the reins of a securities company that does very well in its domestic market but that is still seeking to realize its potential in global investment banking and securities dealing. daiwa is one of the world's largest securities firms. as of march 31, the daiwa group had shareholder equity of 801.21 billion yen ($5.64 billion). for the six months ended sept. 30, daiwa reported unconsolidated (parent company) net income of 79.03 billion yen ($556.5 million) on revenue of 332.38 billion yen ($2.34 billion). both figures were record highs. several observers interpreted mr. dozen's appointment as an attempt by daiwa to make its international operations more profitable while preparing the firm for the effects of the continuing deregulation of japan's domestic markets, which should mean increased competition. all of japan's so-called big four securities firms -- nomura securities co. ltd., the world's largest, nikko securities co. ltd., yamaichi securities co. ltd. and daiwa -- have suffered setbacks in their attempts to break into foreign markets. while they have moved to the fore in underwriting fixed-income securities in the eurobond market -- mostly for japanese firms -- they have been only marginally profitable, if at all, in the u.s. american institutional investors have never had a large appetite for japanese equities. and while the japanese have stepped up their purchases of u.s. shares in the past several months, they have shown themselves in the past to be fickle investors. at the same time, daiwa and its brethren have faced stiff competition from well-entrenched american competitors that have prevented them from building strong links to u.s. corporations and institutional investors. mr. dozen knows these problems firsthand. when he arrived in the u.s. in 1969 -- the start of an eight-year tour -- he tried selling japanese yen-denominated bonds to u.s. investors. "he made desperate efforts, using the yellow pages from beginning to end," said koji yoneyama, president of daiwa's u.s. unit. "but not a single piece of paper was sold." by his own account, mr. dozen didn't do much better with u.s. bonds. in an interview a few months ago, he recalled how after some training at salomon brothers inc., he successfully bid for the opportunity to sell portions of 20 u.s. corporate bond issues. but he couldn't sell any. "japanese stock salesmen selling american bonds? maybe it's crazy," he said. mr. dozen even related the indignity suffered when he and two colleagues went on an overnight fishing expedition off the new jersey shore and caught nothing. upon returning to new york, "exhausted, i got into a taxicab, and the woman driver said: `americans make better fishermen, '" he recalled. undaunted, mr. dozen said that daiwa's goal is to build "a high-technology oriented international organization with maybe some japanese flavor to it." he said that he was particularly interested in his firm gaining expertise in futures, options, mortgaged-backed securities, computerized trading and investment systems as well as mergers and acquisitions. mr. dozen said daiwa's strengths were its large capital base, its influential position in the tokyo market and its links to japanese corporations and institutional investors. mr. dozen joined daiwa upon his graduation from kyoto university in 1959. like many young recruits in japanese securities firms, he began his career peddling stock to individual investors. in his climb to the top, mr. dozen also headed the company's stock-exchange division, its fixed-income units and its international operations. "he was constantly picking up new things to fill out his experience; he is very well-balanced," said takuro isoda, chairman of daiwa's u.s. unit in new york. but it mr. dozen's experience as a salesman that enabled him to gain the political support -- particularly from the retail sales force -- to accede to the presidency. commission income from domestic stock and bond sales accounts form a large portion of japanese securities companies' earnings. and anybody who lacked the backing of the retail sales force "would be fragile," said a daiwa executive. if mr. dozen has a weakness, it may be his golf game. "he digs in the sand instead of hitting the ball, like a farmer," said mr. yoneyama.
inco ltd. posted a 35% decline in third-quarter net income, a performance that was in line with analysts' expectations. the nickel producer also raised its quarterly dividend to 25 cents a share from 20 cents and said it may buy back as much as 4.8% of its common outstanding. inco shares fell after the announcements. analysts said some investors were disappointed that the cash-rich company had failed to announce a special dividend. inco closed at $31.125 a share, down 62.5 cents, in new york stock exchange composite trading. some analysts said inco, which had cash reserves of $272 million as of sept. 30, could still announce a special dividend in the next few months, though it would be smaller than the $10-a-share special dividend it paid last year. the quarterly dividend is payable dec. 1 to shares of record nov. 3. inco's net fell to $129.3 million, or $1.23 a share, in the third quarter from $200.3 million, or $1.88 a share, a year earlier. sales rose 8.2% to $848.7 million from $784.5 million. excluding special gains from tax-loss carry-forwards, earnings in the latest quarter were $117.7 million, or $1.12 a share, compared with $187.4 million, or $1.76 a share. inco said the drop in earnings resulted mainly from lower nickel prices for the period and a temporary cut in nickel output at the company's manitoba operations due to high levels of arsenic in the ore. inco said it plans to buy back as many as five million common shares over the next 12 months if nickel market conditions are favorable. under a previous buyback program, inco has purchased 1.7 million of its shares since april.
ual corp. 's board quashed any prospects for an immediate revival of a labor-management buy-out, saying united airlines' parent should remain independent for now. as a result, ual's chairman, stephen m. wolf, pulled out of the buy-out effort to focus on running the company. the two developments put the acquisition attempt back to square one and leaves the airline with an array of unresolved matters, including an unsettled labor situation and a management scrambling to restore its damaged credibility. the effort to create the nation's largest employee-owned company began unraveling oct. 13 when the labor-management group was unable to obtain financing for its $300-a-share, $6.79 billion offer. just last week it suffered another major setback when british airways plc, the largest equity investor in the labor-management bid, withdrew its support. takeover stock traders, focusing on the company's intention to stay independent, took the announcement as bad news. ual, which had risen $9.875 to $178.375 in composite trading on the new york stock exchange on reports of a new bid being prepared by the group, reversed course and plummeted in off-exchange trading after the 5:09 p.m. edt announcement. among the first trades reported by the securities firm of jefferies & co., which makes a market in ual after the exchange is closed, were 10,000 shares at $170, 6,000 shares at $162, 2,500 at $162, and 10,000 at $158. the rebound in ual stock during regular trading hours monday was its first daily gain after six consecutive losses left the price 41% below its level before oct. 13, the day the group announced the bank financing couldn't be obtained for the original deal. twelve of ual's outside directors met at a five-hour meeting yesterday in chicago to consider an informal proposal from the buy-out group for a revised bid. but the board said it wasn't interested for now. that proposal, valued at between $225 and $240 a share, would have transferred majority ownership to employees while leaving some stock in public hands. the buy-out group had no firm financing for the plan. and, with no other offers on the table, the board apparently felt no pressure to act on it. the directors signaled, however, that they would be willing to consider future offers or take some other action to maximize shareholder value, saying they would continue to explore "all strategic and financial alternatives." but it was clear that for the time being, the board wants the company to return to normalcy. the board said it concluded that "the welfare of the company, its shareholders, its employees and the broader public . . . can best be enhanced by continued development of ual as a strong, viable, independent company." mr. wolf urged all employees to "now turn their full attention" to operating the airline. he also vowed to "make every effort to nurture . . . a constructive new relationship that has been forged with participating employee groups." but mr. wolf faces a monumental task in pulling the company back together again. labor problems top the list. for a brief time, the buy-out effort seemed to solve his problems with united's pilot union. in return for an ownership stake in the company, the pilots were willing to agree to a seven-year contract that included a no-strike clause and significant wage concessions and productivity gains the union previously resisted. that contract was tied to the success of the buy-out. as a "good-will measure," the pilots had been working four extra hours a month and had agreed to fly ual's two new boeing 747-400 aircraft. it's uncertain if the pilots will continue to do so without a contract settlement. the union said late last night that it is still committed to majority employee ownership and that the labor disputes that faced the company prior to the buy-out effort "still need to be addressed." the buy-out effort also worsened already-strained relations between united's pilot and machinist unions. the machinists' criticisms of the labor-management bid and their threats of a strike unless they received substantial wage increases this year helped cool banks' interest in financing the transaction. the machinists previously had shown themselves to be an ally to mr. wolf, but he lost much of his credibility with that group when he teamed up with the pilot union. the machinists criticized the terms mr. wolf and management received in the buy-out. they paid $15 million for a 1% stake and received an additional 9% of the company at no additional cost. his credibility is also on the line in the investment community. until the collapse of this bid, mr. wolf was regarded as one of the nation's savviest airline executives after engineering turnarounds of tiger international inc. and republic airlines. but he and his chief financial officer, john pope, sowed some of the seeds for the deal's failure by insisting banks accept low financing fees and interest rates, while they invested in the transaction only a small fraction of the $114.3 million they stood to gain from sale of their ual stock and options. the board's actions leave takeover stock traders nursing some $700 million in losses and eager to respond to anyone who might make a new offer. it also inevitably leaves a residue of shareholder lawsuits. arbitragers said they were disappointed the company didn't announce some recapitalization or other plan to maximize value. one takeover expert noted that arbitragers could force a recapitalization through the written consent process under which holders may oust the board by a majority vote. the machinists union has suggested it may propose a recapitalization that includes a special dividend for holders and a minority ownership stake for employees. los angeles investor marvin davis, whose $240-a-share offer for ual in august triggered a bidding war, says he remains interested in the airline. however, he is restricted from making certain hostile moves by an agreement he signed to obtain confidential ual data. essentially, he can't make any hostile moves unless he makes a tender offer at least $300 a share.
we've heard california's property-tax-cutting proposition 13 blamed for a lot over the years, but abc's ted koppel came up with a new wrinkle in his earthquake coverage last week when he asked democratic assemblyman richard katz if prop. 13 had withheld money needed for road maintenance. mr. katz happily agreed, sliding over the fact that california's roads and bridges aren't funded by property taxes but by state and federal gasoline taxes. both have been raised at least 30% in recent years, even while the price of gasoline has fallen. dragging prop. 13 into this story is a pretty long stretch.
a series of explosions tore through the huge phillips petroleum co. plastics plant near here, injuring more than a hundred and closing parts of the houston ship channel. there were no immediate reports of deaths, but officials said a number of workers were still unaccounted for last night. the bartlesville, okla., oil company late yesterday still hadn't said officially what caused the explosions and fires, which sent columns of heavy black smoke billowing high into the air. one local phillips manager said a seal blew in one of the plant's reactors. glenn cox, phillips' president and chief operating officer, and other phillips officials flew from bartlesville to assess the damage and determine the cause of the afternoon explosions. in composite trading on the new york stock exchange, phillips petroleum shares fell $1.125 to $23.125. the plastics plant is located on an 800-acre tract in the heart of the petrochemical corridor that reaches along the u.s. gulf coast. the u.s. coast guard closed six miles of the houston ship channel, where about 150 companies have operations, because the thick, black smoke obscured the area. the port of houston closed its terminal for handling bulk cargo. broken water lines and gas leaks hindered firefighters' efforts, but by late yesterday authorities said they had the fire under control. the blasts blew out windows, spewed debris for miles and crumpled the ceiling in an area elementary school. the initial fireball was caught by cameras in downtown houston, about 10 miles away. nearby pasadena, texas, police reported that 104 people had been taken to area hospitals, but a spokeswoman said that toll could rise. the injured, including three in critical condition, were treated for burns, breathing problems and cuts from flying glass, hospital officials said. the plant employs between 800 and 900 on three shifts. the number working at the time of the blast wasn't known. yesterday's explosions were the second round in two months at the plastics plant. in late august, four contract workers were injured and one phillips employee died after an explosion at a fuel supply line near the facility's boiler house. the phillips facility manufactures polyethylene, polypropylene and k-resin, plastics used in a wide array of applications, including milk jugs and toys. plastics are the cornerstone of phillips' chemicals operations, which is the biggest single contributor to the company's profits.
a federal judge in manhattan has entered a judgment requiring a chicago organized crime figure to pay the government $250,000, representing alleged profits he gained from his involvement with the international brotherhood of teamsters. manhattan u.s. attorney otto obermaier said it was the first time ever that the government had obtained any disgorgement from an organized crime figure indicted under the civil racketeering law. joseph lombardo, who the government alleged was the "captain" of organized crime in chicago, was one of numerous defendants in the government's sweeping racketeering suit against the teamsters. in the suit, filed in june 1988, the government accused the union's leadership of depriving its 1.6 million members of their rights through a pattern of racketeering. among other things, the government claimed that organized crime figures had routinely handpicked the union's top officials. u.s. district judge david edelstein also permanently enjoined mr. lombardo from any future dealings with the teamsters or any other labor union. mr. lombardo, the last of the defendants to settle the suit, agreed to pay the government the $250,000 within one week.
exxon corp. said its third-quarter earnings slipped 9% as profits from two of its three major businesses sagged. all cleanup costs from last spring's alaskan oil spill were reflected in earlier results, it said. phillips petroleum co. and atlantic richfield co. also reported declines in quarterly profit, while ashland oil inc. posted a loss for the latest quarter. amerada hess corp. and occidental petroleum corp. reported higher earnings. exxon although exxon spent heavily during the latest quarter to clean up the alaskan shoreline blackened by its huge oil spill, those expenses as well as the cost of a continuing spill-related program are covered by $880 million in charges taken during the first half. an exxon official said that at this time the oil company doesn't anticipate any additional charges to future earnings relating to the cleanup of oil spilled when one of its tankers rammed into an underwater reef. she added, however, that charges already taken don't take into account the potential effect of litigation involving the oil spill. she said that impact can't be reasonably assessed yet. exxon's net income during the third quarter dropped to $1.11 billion, or 87 cents a share, from $1.22 billion, or 93 cents a share, a year earlier. revenue rose 8.1%, to $23.65 billion from $21.88 billion. during the third quarter, exxon purchased 8.34 million shares of its stock at a cost of $373 million. exxon's profitability, like that of many other oil companies, was hurt during the third quarter by declining returns from the chemicals and refining and marketing businesses. exxon's earnings from chemicals operations fell $90 million, to $254 million, while refining and marketing profits declined $180 million, to $357 million. although crude oil prices were significantly higher this year, they weren't strong enough to offset the declining profits in those business sectors at most oil companies, said william randol, oil analyst for first boston corp. he estimates that the price of west texas intermediate, the u.s. benchmark crude, was $4.04 a barrel higher during the third quarter of this year than in the same period last year. ashland oil a rash of one-time charges left ashland oil with a loss of $39 million for its fiscal fourth quarter. a year earlier, the refiner earned $66 million, or $1.19 a share. quarterly revenue rose 4.5%, to $2.3 billion from $2.2 billion. for the year, net income tumbled 61% to $86 million, or $1.55 a share. the ashland, ky., oil company reported a $38 million charge resulting from settlement of a 10-year dispute with the national iranian oil co. over claims that ashland didn't pay for iranian crude it had received. in september, ashland settled the long-simmering dispute by agreeing to pay iran $325 million. ashland also took a $25 million after-tax charge to cover anticipated costs to correct problems with boilers built by one of its subsidiaries. the oil refiner also booked a $15 million charge for selling ashland technology corp., one of its subsidiaries, at a loss. amerada hess third-quarter earnings at amerada hess more than tripled to $51.81 million, or 64 cents a share, from $15.7 million, or 20 cents a share, a year earlier. revenue climbed 28%, to $1.18 billion from $925 million. profits improved across hess's businesses. refining and marketing earnings climbed to $33.3 million from $12.9 million, and exploration and production earnings rose to $37.1 million from $17.9 million. hess's earnings were up despite a $30 million charge to cover the cost of maintaining operations after hurricane hugo heavily damaged the company's refinery at st. croix. it is widely known within industry circles that hess had to buy oil products in the high-priced spot markets to continue supplying its customers. hess declined to comment. phillips petroleum phillips petroleum's third-quarter earnings slid 60%, to $87 million, or 36 cents a share, from $215 million, or 89 cents a share. revenue rose 6.9%, to $3.1 billion from $2.9 billion. shrinking profit margins in chemical and refining and marketing sectors accounted for most of the decline, said chairman c.j. silas in a statement. despite higher oil prices, exploration and production profits were off because of foreign-currency losses and some construction costs incurred in one of phillips' north sea oil fields. a year ago, results were buoyed by a $20 million after-tax gain from an asset sale. occidental petroleum occidental petroleum's third-quarter net income rose 2.9% to $108 million, or 39 cents a share, from $105 million, or 38 cents a share, a year earlier. the latest quarter included an after-tax gain of $71 million from non-recurring items. sales dropped 2%, to $4.8 billion from $4.9 billion. the latest period included a $54 million gain from the sale of various oil and gas properties, a $22 million charge from the restructuring of occidental's domestic oil and gas operations, and tax credits of $42 million. both periods included non-recurring charges of $3 million for early retirement of debt. occidental said oil and gas earnings fell to $17 million from $20 million. the latest period includes net gains of $32 million in non-recurring credits from the sale of properties, indicating operating losses for the quarter in the oil and gas division. chemical earnings fell 10%, reflecting softening of demand. atlantic richfield citing its reduced ownership in the lyondell petrochemical co., atlantic richfield reported that net income slid 3.1% in the third quarter to $379 million, or $2.19 a share, from $391 million, or $2.17 a share, for the comparable period last year. sales fell 20%, to $3.7 billion from $4.6 billion. arco's earnings from its 49.9% stake in lyondell fell to $37 million from $156 million for the same period last year, when lyondell was wholly owned. offsetting the lower stake in lyondell were higher crude oil prices, increased natural gas volumes and higher coke prices, the company said. coal earnings rose to $26 million from $21 million. for the nine months, arco reported net income of $1.6 billion, or $8.87 a share, up 33% from $1.2 billion, or $6.56 a share a year earlier. sales were $12 billion, off 13% from $13.8 billion. jeff rowe contributed to this article.
the following were among yesterday's offerings and pricings in the u.s. and non-u.s. capital markets, with terms and syndicate manager, as compiled by dow jones capital markets report: imo industries inc. -- $150 million of senior subordinated debentures due 2001, priced at par to yield 12%. the issue will be sold through morgan stanley & co. other details weren't available. san antonio, texas -- $575 million of electric and gas system revenue refunding bonds, series 1989, 1989a and 1989b, tentatively priced by a first boston corp. group to yield from 6.15% in 1991 to 7.30% in 2009. the issue includes current interest bonds due 1991-2000, 2009, 2012, 2014 and 2016, and capital appreciation bonds due 2001-2005. the current interest serial bonds are priced to yield from 6.15% in 1991 to 7.10% in 2000. there are about $100 million of 7% term bonds due 2009, priced to yield 7.30%, which is the issue's high yield. there are also about $124 million of 6 1/2% bonds priced to yield 7.25% in 2012; about $97 million of 6% bonds priced to yield 7.20% in 2014; and about $26.5 million of 5% bonds priced to yield 7.15% in 2016. all of the term bonds are original issue discount bonds, according to the lead underwriter. the capital appreciation bonds are tentatively priced to yield to maturity from 7% in 2001 to 7.10% in 2003-2005. the bonds are rated double-a by moody's investors service inc. and standard & poor's corp. maryland stadium authority -- $137.6 million of sports facilities lease revenue bonds, series 1989 d, due 1992-1999, 2004, 2009 and 2019, tentatively priced at par by a morgan stanley group to yield from 6.35% in 1992 to 7.60% in 2019. serial bonds are priced to yield to 7.10% in 1999. there are $15,845,000 of 7 3/8% bonds priced at par and due 2004; $22,985,000 of 7 1/2% bonds priced at par and due 2009; and $82.6 million of 7.60% bonds priced at par and due 2019. the bonds are rated double-a by moody's and double-a-minus by s&p. interest on the bonds will be treated as a preference item in calculating the federal alternative minimum tax that may be imposed on certain investors. federal home loan mortgage corp. -- $250 million of remic mortgage securities being offered in 11 classes by morgan stanley. the offering, series 107, is backed by freddie mac 15-year, 9% securities, and brings freddie mac's 1989 remic issuance to $32.8 billion and its total volume to $46.8 billion since the program began in february 1988. the offering used at-market pricing. federal national mortgage association -- $500 million of remic mortgage securities being offered in 10 classes by merrill lynch capital markets. the offering, series 1989-85, is backed by fannie mae 9% securities. separately, a $400 million issue of fannie mae remic mortgage securities is being offered in 15 classes by bear, stearns & co. the offering, series 1989-86, is backed by fannie mae 9% securities. finally, a $300 million issue of fannie mae remic mortgage securities is being offered in 12 classes by smith barney, harris upham & co. the offering, series 1989-87, is backed by fannie mae 9 1/2% securities. the three offerings together bring fannie mae's 1989 remic issuance to $32.4 billion and its total remic volume to $44.5 billion since the program began in april 1987. credit agricole (cnca) (french) -- $250 million of 8 3/4% bonds due nov. 21, 1994, priced at 101.80 to yield 8.77% annually less full fees, via ibj international ltd. fees 1 7/8. hokuriku electric power co. (japan) -- $200 million of 8 7/8% bonds due nov. 20, 1996, priced at 101 3/4 to yield 8.90% less full fees, via yamaichi international (europe) ltd. fees 1 7/8. international finance corp. (agency) -- 10 billion pesetas of 11.6% bonds due nov. 30, 1994, priced at 101 5/8 to yield 11.60% less full fees, via citibank (madrid) and banco espanol de credito, spain. fees 1 5/8. royal bank of canada, grand cayman branch (canada) -- 100 million canadian dollars of 10 3/4% deposit notes due nov. 30, 1994, priced at 101 3/4 to yield 10.78% less full fees, via rbc dominion securities international ltd. fees 1 7/8. union bank of finland -- 100 million australian dollars of 9% bonds due nov. 9, 1990, priced at 94 to yield 17.20% less full fees, via banque paribas capital markets ltd. fees 1. ford motor credit -- $2.57 billion of certificates backed by automobile loans with a coupon rate of 8.70%, priced at 99 19/32 to yield 8.903% through an underwriting group headed by first boston corp. the issue is the first by ford motor credit, a unit of ford motor co., and the second largest in the four-year history of the $45 billion asset-backed market. the largest issue was a $4 billion offering of auto-loan securities by general motors acceptance corp. in 1986. the ford issue, through ford credit 1989-a grantor trust, was priced at a yield spread of 95 basis points above the treasury 7 3/4% issue due july 1991. the offering is rated doublea-2 by moody's and double-a by s&p, based on the quality of the underlying auto loans and a guarantee covering 9% of the deal from ford motor credit. the certificates have an estimated average life of 1.8 years, assuming monthly prepayments at 1.3% of the original balance. the final maturity is in five years.
the mouth is back. morton downey jr., who self-destructed as a talk-show host and frequently verbally abused his guests, has been signed to co-host a half-hour nightly program on the consumer news and business channel, the cable channel partly owned by the general electric co. 's national broadcasting co. the premiere of "showdown," with mr. downey and richard g. carter, a columnist with the new york daily news, is scheduled for dec. 4 at 8 p.m. cnbc is available to 13 million cable households. mr. downey said he is not going to change his style, which some critics said was flamboyant and others deemed offensive. "but i'm going to proceed in a more logical way. i'm not going to do anything that is not acceptable in anyone's home. but that doesn't mean i'm not going to get angry." michael eskridge, president of cnbc, said that although there will be a studio audience, viewers will no longer have to endure the shouting of "mort! mort! mort!" but just how does mr. downey's unorthodox style mesh with the sedate tone of cnbc's business programming? "ninety percent of mort's old show fits into our style," said mr. eskridge. "that is consumer issues." mr. downey's previous show, a one-hour shout fest, syndciated by mca inc. and produced by quantum media inc., was canceled in july after advertisers and stations abandoned it.
investors dumped stocks of big companies whose earnings fluctuate with the economy. many of those "cyclical" issues are in the dow jones industrial average, which fell 26.23 to 2662.91. declining issues on the new york stock exchange outpaced advancers, 1,012 to 501. recession fears are springing up again among investors. analysts say that the selling of cyclical stocks yesterday will be followed by a sell-off in shares of companies with big debt loads on their balance sheets. in an economic slowdown, heavy debt loads reduce the flexibility of companies because cash that would normally be used to keep the company buoyant must be diverted to interest payments. on the other hand, investors beat a clear path yesterday to blue-chip issues with proven earnings growth records. among the 30 dow industrials, they bought mcdonald's, coca-cola co. and procter & gamble and sold aluminum co. of america. in another sign of slowdown fears, investors dumped technology shares. many money managers are bracing for a decline in stocks of companies with big debt loads on their balance sheets. "the junk bond market is being taken apart" because of recession fears, said j. david mills, senior vice president at boston company advisers. "under this scrutiny, the first thing you do is sell your cyclical stocks and the second thing you do is sell your over-leveraged companies." in fact, much of the buying in blue chips yesterday was a pursuit of companies with lower debt levels. in a recent investment letter entitled "winners of the `leverage wars, ' " edward kerschner, chairman of painewebber's investment policy committee, suggested that investors buy stocks of companies that have avoided loading up on debt. "we're saying companies have to pay increasing attention to balance sheets," said mr. kerschner. he suggested that investors buy the shares of great atlantic & pacific tea, j. baker, mcdonald's, philip morris and sara lee. he said that all of these companies will be able to compete fiercely in an economic downturn. mcdonald's has long-term debt equaling 91% of shareholder equity currently, but mr. kerschner said the company is carrying real estate assets at about $2.6 billion below their real value. coca-cola climbed 1 3/8 to 72 1/8; mcdonald's added 1 to 31 3/8, and procter & gamble gained 3/4 to 130 5/8. a&p fell 1 1/4 to 57 5/8, and j. baker gained 3/8 to 21 1/4. philip morris slipped 1/2 to 43 7/8, while sara lee closed unchanged at 60 1/8. according to salomon brothers' "stub" stock index of 20 companies whose debt is giant compared with shareholder equity, investors are already beginning to retreat from shares of debt-laden companies. from january to early september, the index of stub stocks -- the tiny portion of equity that's publicly traded following a recapitalization -- outperformed standard & poor's 500-stock index by about 20%. but starting in early september, the index started to slide and now stands about even with the s&p 500. "stocks that have a high default risk have started to underperform those stocks that have a lower default risk," said eric sorenson, director of quantitative analysis at salomon brothers. "companies that have the most exposure to the business cycle have underperformed since late last summer." union carbide, whose third-quarter earnings dropped about 35% from a year earlier and fell short of analysts' expectations, declined 1/2 to 24 1/2. also, exxon went down 3/8 to 45 3/4 and allied-signal lost 7/8 to 35 1/8 even though the companies' results for the quarter were in line with forecasts. other weak blue-chip issues included chevron, which went down 2 to 64 7/8 in big board composite trading of 1.3 million shares; goodyear tire & rubber, off 1 1/2 to 46 3/4, and american express, down 3/4 to 37 1/4. texas instruments, which had reported friday that third-quarter earnings fell more than 30% from the year-ago level, went down 2 1/8 to 33 on 1.1 million shares. motorola, another major semiconductor producer, dropped 1 1/8 to 57 1/2. pinnacle west capital, whose earnings have been hurt by continued problems at its merabank unit, fell 1 5/8 to 9 1/8 on 2.1 million shares to lead the big board's list of most active issues. growing pressures on the arizona real-estate market are affecting the thrift; pinnacle west told dow jones professional investor report it may consider filing for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection if it can't reach an agreement with federal regulators to provide additional capital to merabank. hercules dropped 2 5/8 to 41 3/4 on one million shares -- about six times its average daily trading volume -- after a disappointing third-quarter earnings report. merrill lynch and prudential-bache securities both lowered the stock's investment rating immediately after the results were issued friday, according to pir. elsewhere in the chemicals sector, dow chemical fell 1 1/4 to 97 1/2, monsanto lost 1 7/8 to 118, b.f. goodrich slipped 2 1/4 to 44 3/4 and olin slid 1 to 57 3/4. other stocks hurt by earnings-related selling included tandy, which dropped 1 3/8 to 44, and eaton, which retreated 2 1/2 to 57 1/2. third-quarter earnings at both companies were below analysts' forecasts. after declining about 41% last week, ual advanced 9 7/8 to 178 3/8 on 1.1 million shares on anticipation of a revised takeover offer from a labor-management group for the parent company of united airlines. however, delta air lines fell 1 1/2 to 67 1/2 and usair group dropped 3/4 to 42 1/2. ramada gained 7/8 to 11 1/4 after revamping the terms of its restructuring plan, which calls for the company to sell its hotel operations for $540 million and spin off its casino business to shareholders. the revision follows last month's withdrawal of a $400 million junk-bond offering for the new casino company, aztar corp. mead gained 1 to 37 7/8. usa today reported that the rales brothers, washington, d.c.-based investors who made an unsuccessful offer to acquire interco last year, have bought nearly 3% of mead's common shares. entertainment and media stocks generally escaped the market's slide as well. paramount communications rose 5/8 to 58 3/4, time warner climbed 1 7/8 to 138 5/8, walt disney advanced 3 1/8 to 127 1/2, mca rose 1 1/8 to 65 5/8 and mcgraw-hill added 1/2 to 67 1/8. the american stock exchange market value index lost 3.11 to 379.46. volume totaled 10,450,000 shares. carnival cruise lines class a fell 1 3/4 to 20 3/4. the company said it had been notified unofficially that waertsilae marine industries, a finnish shipyard building three cruise ships for the company, is having financial trouble and may already have filed for bankruptcy.
"hacksaw" and "bonecrusher" are the sort of nicknames normally associated with linebackers and heavyweight contenders. who'd have thought that the next group of tough guys carrying around reputations like that would be school superintendents? chicago's new school chief is the hard-nosed ted kimbrough. at his old job in compton, calif., he took a bitter teachers' strike and nearly came to blows with a school-board member. at his first chicago press conference, he berated the reporters. in new york city, the new chancellor, joseph fernandez, has landed like a 16-inch shell in the middle of a system that has been impervious to serious reform. both men fit the mood of the times -- the mood being one of a public fed up with officials' rationalizations for why their schools don't work. former patterson, n.j., principal joe clark was no doubt the general public's first experience with this new breed of no-nonsense administrator. the subject of the movie "lean on me," mr. clark controlled his school with a bullhorn and a baseball bat. he may have gone overboard in his pursuit of good discipline, but isn't it interesting that some of the country's biggest, most troubled school districts are choosing new chiefs from the same gravel-chewing mold? elena scambio, the woman assigned to run the jersey city school system that was taken over by the state, says her top priority will be to "cut through the dead hand of bureaucracy." mr. fernandez doesn't take control in new york until january, but already he's roiling the waters. he's attacked the concept of "building tenure," one of the most disgraceful institutions in american public schools. it means it is virtually impossible to fire or even transfer incompetent principals. once they are in the building, they stay. one south bronx principal kept his job for 16 years, despite a serious drinking problem and rarely showing up for work. he was finally given leave when he was arrested for allegedly buying crack. naturally, the principals' union loves building tenure, and tenure has withstood previous challenge. we suggest that mr. fernandez find an incompetent principal, toss him out of the building and let the forces of the status quo explain to the parents whatever it is they're defending. in his old job, as dade county chief, mr. fernandez forced out 92 teachers and reshuffled 48 principals. he cut the dropout rate by 5.5%. but the no-more-nonsense superintendents are going to have to be judicious as well; incompetent principals and administrators should go, but the good ones ought to be left alone. the situation will be especially delicate for mr. kimbrough. he takes over a school system in the midst of radical reform. chicagoans have just elected 540 neophyte school boards, one for each school. this of course led to disaster in new york city. getting a community of parents to care again about its schools is essential, but in chicago the new boards will make mistakes and mr. kimbrough will have to identify them. the rise of superintendents such as joseph fernandez and ted kimbrough suggests plainly the process of disintegration in many school systems. the schools' central mission, educating children, became subsumed by the competing interests of bureaucrats, politicians and unions. the classroom itself operated on the periphery of this awful system, discipline collapsed, and kids stopped learning. mr. chips was a nice fellow, and maybe some day he'll return. until then, it's clear that some of the people who've been keeping big-city schools down are going to be dealing with the terminator.
ingersoll publications co. agreed to buy the new haven register in a transaction valued at $275 million from goodson newspaper group inc. as part of the agreement, goodson also terminated the contract under which ingersoll manages goodson's 66 newspapers, ending a long association between the two companies that has turned increasingly bitter recently. goodson has accused ingersoll of paying less attention to its properties and more to such ventures as the recent launch of the st. louis sun. under the terms of the accord, ingersoll will pay about $255 million for the register, a daily that goodson bought for about $170 million in 1986. goodson will pay the additional $20 million in settlement of the management contract. goodson also announced that it hired the former president and senior vice president of ingersoll to run the goodson papers. both executives left the company after clashes with chairman ralph ingersoll jr. goodson, which is based here, will use part of the proceeds to pay down debt associated with its purchase of the morristown daily record for $155 million in 1987. the new jersey paper, like the new haven, conn., paper, was purchased by ingersoll on goodson's behalf as part of the management contract. industry analysts have said that the purchase price for the paper was too high, causing a strain on goodson's finances. investment bankers familiar with the company said goodson is seeking a new bank credit line of $190 million and may have to sell additional newspapers. david n. hurwitz, president and chief operating officer of goodson, said in a telephone interview that the company doesn't currently have any plans to sell additional newspapers. goodson said david carr, former president of ingersoll publications, and ray cockburn, former senior vice president, would head the new in-house management team at goodson, which had revenue of $225 million in 1988. the association between the two companies stretches back thirty years to a friendship between television producer mark goodson and ingersoll founder ralph ingersoll. the latter's son, ralph ingersoll jr., took over the company and has been managing the goodson properties and acting as an agent in the purchase of newspapers for goodson. but in recent years, mr. ingersoll began focusing more on expanding his own newspaper empire in partnership with investment banking firm warburg, pincus & co. ingersoll has 28 dailies and 200 other non-daily papers in the u.s. and europe. the company said its revenue will exceed $750 million this year. ingersoll president robert m. jelenic said in a statement that the company is "delighted by the conclusion of the goodson relationship" and will be able to "concentrate all our energies" on ingersoll's own papers. mr. goodson, in his own statement, was less upbeat, saying "unfortunately over the past few years, it has become increasingly clear that ralph and i have different agendas," and that he feels "more comfortable with a management team whose sole interest and responsibility is in the goodson papers."
just five months after ogilvy group was swallowed up in an unsolicited takeover, kenneth roman, ogilvy's chairman and chief executive officer, said he is leaving to take a top post at american express co. mr. roman, 59 years old, abruptly announced he will leave the venerable ad agency, whose largest client is american express, to become american express's executive vice president for corporate affairs and communications. he will succeed harry l. freeman, 57, who has said he will retire in december. mr. freeman said in august that he would retire by the end of this year to take "executive responsibility" for an embarrassing effort to discredit banker edmond safra. american express representatives apparently influenced the publication of unfavorable articles about mr. safra. the company later apologized and agreed to make $8 million in contributions to charities chosen by him. although mr. freeman is retiring, he will continue to work as a consultant for american express on a project basis. ad industry executives weren't surprised by mr. roman's decision to leave ogilvy. the agency, under his direction, bitterly fought a takeover attempt by wpp group plc of london before succumbing in may. and although mr. roman and wpp's chief executive, martin sorrell, have gone out of their way to be publicly supportive of each other, people close to mr. roman say he was unhappy giving up control of the company. some executives also cite tension because of efforts by mr. sorrell, a financial man, to cut costs at the agency. mr. roman will be succeeded as the head of ogilvy's flagship ad agency, ogilvy & mather worldwide, by graham phillips, 50, who had been president of north american operations and who, like mr. sorrell, is british. alexander brody, 56, will take on the newly created position of president of the world-wide agency and chief executive of its international operations. he had been president of the international operations. mr. roman also had overseen ogilvy group's two other units, the scali mccabe sloves advertising agency and its research division, but those units will now report directly to wpp. mr. roman appears custom-made for the american express job. known as a traditional executive, he is very much in the conservative american express mold. moreover, after 26 years at ogilvy he had honed a reputation for being squeaky-clean and a straight arrow -- which can only help american express in the wake of the safra incident. he also is close to american express's chairman and chief executive officer, james d. robinson iii. aside from working with mr. robinson on the american express advertising account for about 11 years, mr. roman serves on several of the same charities and boards as mr. robinson. the abrupt management change sparked widespread speculation that mr. roman had been pushed out of ogilvy's top spot by mr. sorrell. but mr. roman flatly denied the speculation, saying mr. sorrell had tried several times to persuade him to stay, offering various incentives and in one instance sending a note with a case of wine (the wine, naturally, was seagram's brand, an ogilvy client). "he asked me not to resign. the implication that i was pushed aside wouldn't be accurate," mr. roman said. mr. sorrell, traveling in the far east, couldn't be reached. mr. roman said american express's mr. robinson first approached him about the job in late september. according to industry executives, peter sutherland, a former european community commissioner from ireland, was also a serious contender for the american express job. although it ultimately wasn't offered to him, he will be on retainer to american express as an adviser on international matters. after talking on and off for the past four weeks, mr. roman said, he agreed to take the job because "it's the right time, it's a terrific opportunity, and i think i leave the company in very strong hands. it was my decision, not anyone else's." mr. roman also brushed aside reports about infighting between him and mr. phillips, his successor at ogilvy. the two executives could hardly be more different. mr. roman comes across as a low-key executive; mr. phillips has a flashier personality. during time off, mr. roman tends to his garden; mr. phillips confesses to a fondness for, among other things, fast cars and planes. industry executives say that although the two executives used to clash more frequently, the wpp takeover brought them closer together. "i'm the guy who made him head of new york, head of the u.s., president of north america, and recommended him {to mr. sorrell} as my successor. would i have done all those things successively if i didn't think he was the right guy?" mr. roman asked. he labeled reports of friction "ridiculous," and said that he spent part of the weekend on mr. phillips's boat in connecticut. mr. roman will oversee american express's public relations and government affairs, among other things, but he won't be involved in its advertising, which is handled by the operating units. "i consider this a second career," he said. he also will sit on the company's corporate planning and policy committee, made up of the top corporate and operating executives. mr. roman's departure isn't expected to have any enormous repercussions at ogilvy. american express, kraft general foods, and mattel executives said the move won't affect their relationships with the ad agency. "general foods's relationships with its agencies are based on the agencies' work, and will continue to be," said david hurwitt, a vice president of kraft general foods. but some clients and analysts expressed concern that mr. phillips isn't as well-known to many clients. "ken was my key contact," said j. nicholas hahn, president and chief executive officer of cotton inc., which represents cotton producers. "i don't know {mr. phillips} all that well. i haven't seen or talked to him in several years." and some analysts questioned whether mr. phillips would have the skills ogilvy needs to turn the agency around. while the agency has done well in many parts of the world, its flagship new york office has had a dismal track record recently; it has won few new accounts while losing big ones, including maxwell house. "i think {mr. phillips} is going to need some help. i think they need creative leadership, and i don't think they have it," said emma hill, an analyst with wertheim & co. ogilvy & mather's top creative executive, norman berry, left the agency earlier this year. "norm berry was a creative inspiration at the company, and nobody has filled that void," said ms. hill. but other analysts said that having mr. phillips succeed mr. roman would make for a smooth transition. "graham phillips has been there a long time, knows the culture well, is aggressive, and apparently gets along well with" mr. sorrell, said andrew wallach, an analyst with drexel burnham lambert. "it's probably a reasonable transition. hopefully, he'll be the answer to the problems they've had in new york." sale of saatchi unit close computer sciences corp., el segundo, calif., said it is close to making final an agreement to buy cleveland consulting associates from saatchi & saatchi computer sciences wouldn't disclose the proposed purchase price for cleveland consulting, which counsels companies on logistics and supply. but david lord, managing editor of consultants news, an industry publication based in fitzwilliam, n.h., said an industry standard would suggest a purchase price of between one and two times cleveland consulting's approximately $15 million annual revenue. both saatchi & saatchi, which announced its intention to sell off most of its consulting business in june, and cleveland consulting declined to comment on the proposed sale. ad notes. . . . new account: ambase corp., new york, awarded the ad account for its home insurance co. unit to biederman, kelly & shaffer, new york. billings weren't disclosed. . . . puerto rico telephone co. awarded its $3 million account to west indies & grey, grey advertising's office in puerto rico. diet coke: coca-cola co. yesterday said singer elton john signed to appear in an ad for diet coke. details of the commercial, which will be part of the brand's 1990 advertising campaign, weren't disclosed. mr. john becomes the latest of many music stars, including george michael and whitney houston, to appear in ads for the diet drink.
turner broadcasting system inc. said it formed a unit to make and distribute movies to theaters overseas and, eventually, to u.s. theaters, too. the operator of cable-television networks said the new turner pictures unit will produce movies that will premiere on turner broadcasting's turner network television channel, or tnt, and then will be released internationally in movie theaters. the unit's first two offerings are slated to be "the secret life of ian fleming," a dramatization about the former british spy who wrote the james bond novels, and "treasure island," produced by charlton heston, who also stars in the movie. ted turner, turner broadcasting's chairman, was named chairman of turner pictures, and gerry hogan, president of turner entertainment networks, was named president of the unit. in an interview, mr. hogan said the subsidiary's primary mission will be to make movies for tnt and to distribute them internationally. but he said turner broadcasting already has found some ideas that might work well as films for theatrical release in the u.s. "when that occurs, and when the time is right, we'll release the films in the u.s.," he said, adding that turner pictures may develop such movies next year for domestic release in 1991. turner has made several movies, docudramas and documentaries for its networks in recent years, but the company has never acted as a full-fledged movie studio and released its own pictures to theaters. mr. hogan said " the secret life of ian fleming" and "treasure island" cost more than $6 million each to make, which is only about one-third the cost of most movies made for theatrical release. the turner move is in line with a cable-tv trend toward more original programming -- and toward finding more ways to amortize the high cost of producing films. in july, viacom inc. formed viacom pictures to produce 12 low-budget movies a year that will premiere on showtime network and be distributed later in various markets, including foreign theaters.
in a sign the stock slump hasn't quieted europe's takeover fever, cie. financiere de paribas said it intends to bid for one of france's other large financial and industrial holding companies, cie. de navigation mixte. paribas said that once it receives the go-ahead from french stock market authorities, it will offer to boost its navigation mixte stake to 66.7% from the current 18.7%. its cash-or-shares bid values navigation mixte at about 22.82 billion francs ($3.62 billion), making this one of france's largest-ever attempted takeovers. the cost of buying the additional 48% stake would be 10.95 billion francs ($1.74 billion). the move would greatly boost paribas's stake in the insurance, transport and food businesses, where navigation mixte is strong. it also would make paribas a major french ally of west germany's allianz ag insurance group. allianz holds a 50% stake in navigation mixte's insurance interests, acquired three weeks ago. those include rhin et moselle vie and via assurances. long considered a potential takeover target, navigation mixte had hoped allianz would help protect it from raiders. that idea may have backfired. paribas is allianz's main french bank, and the munich-based group said it intends to stay neutral. navigation mixte said it wouldn't have any comment until its board meets wednesday. but navigation mixte is loosely held and hard to defend. "the defensive options are limited," says philippe braye, a partner in portfolio management concern france finance quatre. "who would bid against paribas?" if the paribas bid succeeds, it will be the second time in two months a big french investment banking group has snapped up an insurance group. last month, paribas's archrival, cie. financiere de suez, won a battle for groupe victoire, france's second-largest private-sector insurer, which itself had just acquired west germany's colonia versicherung ag. that complex bid was billed as france's largest takeover ever (this one is slightly smaller). moreover, suez had just finished winning an even larger battle last year for control of societe generale de belgique. paribas officials, once considered france's toughest bankers, felt abashed at suez's success and its rapid growth. although paribas denies it, analysts say the new bid in part simply reflects the continuing rivalry between france's two largest investment banking groups. it also reflects the broader pressure on companies in europe to keep up as the european community prepares to reduce internal trade barriers by 1992. although paribas chairman michel francois-poncet wouldn't rule out eventually selling all of navigation mixte's insurance operations to allianz, he stressed the potential for the two groups instead to cooperate. he also told reporters the acquisition would give paribas fresh diversity, bringing it properties in food and transport where it has been weak. navigation mixte has investments in a sugar company, a food and canning concern, a bakery and bus and trucking firms, among others. and navigation mixte has a huge hidden attraction. payment by allianz for the insurance interests it has just bought will help swell the french concern's treasury to an estimated 11 billion francs. paribas said it will bid 1,850 francs a share for navigation mixte shares that qualify for a full yearly dividend, and 1,800 francs for those created july 1, which are eligible for partial dividends. alternatively, it said it would offer three paribas shares, themselves eligible for dividends as of next jan. 1, for one navigation mixte share. paribas shares closed down 30 francs at 610 francs, and navigation mixte shares were suspended at 1,800 francs pending the outcome of the bid. paribas said it would publish details of its bid once authorities clear it. this is one of the first bids under new takeover rules aimed at encouraging open bids instead of gradual accumulation of large stakes. some financial sources said privately that paribas blundered in failing to move sooner for the insurance and industrial group, bidding only after speculation had pushed up the price. mr. francois-poncet responded that his group initially intended to take only a minority stake, striking an alliance with current management. when notoriously independent-minded navigation mixte chairman marc fournier rejected paribas's offer and began buying paribas shares in retaliation, mr. francois-poncet said, he felt obliged to bid for control. he told reporters he had information that mr. fournier was preparing to buy as much as 20% of paribas, up from less than 5% currently. a bid against paribas couldn't be ruled out. france's second-largest government-owned insurance company, assurances generales de france, has been building its own navigation mixte stake, currently thought to be between 8% and 10%. analysts said they don't think it is contemplating a takeover, however, and its officials couldn't be reached.
crude oil futures prices fell further as analysts and traders said opec oil producers aren't putting the brakes on output ahead of the traditionally weak first quarter. in trading on the new york mercantile exchange, the u.s. benchmark west texas intermediate crude fell 39 cents a barrel to $19.76 for december delivery. petroleum products prices also declined. analysts pointed to reports that the organization of petroleum exporting countries is producing substantially more than its official limit of 20.5 million barrels a day, with some accounts putting the 13-nation group's output as high as 23 million barrels a day. that level of production didn't take its toll on futures prices for the fourth quarter, when demand is traditionally strong. but because first-quarter demand is normally the weakest of the year, several market participants say, opec production will have to decline to keep prices from eroding further. the group plans to meet in a month to discuss production strategy for early 1990. with prices already headed lower, news of a series of explosions at a major phillips petroleum co. chemical facility on the houston ship channel also was bearish for prices. even though such facilities use a relatively small amount of crude, analysts say, now the facility won't need any, at a time of already high availability. the phillips plant makes polyethylene, polypropylene and other plastic products. a company official said the explosions began when a seal blew out. dozens of workers were injured, authorities said. there was no immediate estimate of damage from the company. some petroleum futures traders say technical considerations now will help to put downward pressure on futures prices. for instance, one trader said that prices inevitably will go lower now that they've fallen below $20 a barrel. "our technician is a little bearish now that we've taken out $20," he said. in other commodity markets yesterday: copper: the selling that started on friday continued yesterday. the december contract fell 3.85 cents a pound to $1.1960. london metal exchange warehouse stocks were down only 4,800 metric tons for the week to 84,500 tons; expectations late last week were a drop of 10,000 to 15,000 tons. the new york market made its high for the day on the opening and when it dropped below the $1.23-a-pound level, selling picked up as previous buyers bailed out of their positions and aggressive short sellers -- anticipating further declines -- moved in. fund selling also picked up at that point. according to bernard savaiko, senior commodity analyst at painewebber, the only stability to the market came when short sellers periodically moved in to cover their positions by buying contracts. this activity produced small rallies, which in turn attracted new short selling. mr. savaiko noted that copper had a steep fall in spite of a weak dollar, which would normally support the u.s. copper market. such support usually comes from arbitragers who use a strong british pound to buy copper in new york. "the sell-off would probably have been worse if the dollar had been strong," he said. copper has been stuck in a trading range of $1.19 to $1.34. mr. savaiko believes that if copper falls below the bottom of this range the next significant support level will be about $1.04. precious metals: platinum and palladium struggled to maintain their prices all day despite news stories over the weekend that recent cold fusion experiments, which use both metals, showed signs of producing extra heat. january platinum closed down $2.80 an ounce at $486.30, nearly $4 above its low for the day. december palladium was off $1.55 an ounce at $137.20. platinum is believed to have good support around $480 and palladium at around $130. some traders were thought to be waiting for the auto sales report, which will be released today. such sales are watched closely by platinum and palladium traders because both metals are used in automobile catalytic converters. mr. savaiko theorized that the news on cold fusion didn't affect the market yesterday because many traders have already been badly burnt by such stories. he said the traders are demanding a higher level of proof before they will buy palladium again. also weighing on both metals' prices is the role of the chief supplier, the soviet union. many analysts believe that the soviets' thirst for dollars this year to buy grain and other western commodities and goods will bring them to the market whenever prices rally very much. grains and soybeans: prices closed mixed as contracts reacted to largely offsetting bullish and bearish news. on the chicago board of trade, soybeans for november delivery closed at $5.63 a bushel, down half a cent, while the december wheat contract rose three-quarters of a cent to $4.0775 a bushel. supporting prices was the announcement late friday of additional grain sales to the soviet union. but acting as a drag on prices was the improved harvest weather over the weekend and the prospect for continued fair weather this week over much of the farm belt. strong farmer selling over the weekend also weighed on prices. sugar: world prices tumbled, mostly from their own weight, according to analysts. the march contract ended at 13.79 cents a pound, down 0.37 cent. for the past week or so, traders have been expecting india to buy between 150,000 and 200,000 tons of refined sugar, and there have been expectations of a major purchase by japan. but with no reports of either country actually entering the market, analysts said, futures prices became vulnerable. developing countries such as india, some analysts said, seem to have made it a point to stay away whenever sugar reached the top of its trading range, around 14.75 cents, and wait for prices to return to the bottom of the range, around 13.50 cents. but erik dunlaevy, a sugar analyst with balfour maclaine international ltd., said the explanation for the latest drop in sugar prices is much simpler: speculators, he said, "got too long too soon and ran into resistance around the old contract highs." a painewebber analyst said that in light of a new estimate of a production increase of four million metric tons and only a modest increase in consumption, sugar isn't likely to rise above the top of its trading range without a crop problem in a major producing country. cocoa: futures rallied modestly. the december contract rose $33 a metric ton to $1,027, near its high for the day. gill & duffus ltd., a british cocoa-trading house, estimated that the 1989-90 world cocoa surplus would be 231,000 tons, down from 314,000 tons for the previous year. market technicians were encouraged by the price patterns, which in the past have preceded sharp rallies. recent prices for cocoa have been near levels last seen in the mid-1970s. at such prices, according to mr. savaiko, bargain hunting and short-covering -- buying back of contracts previously sold -- by speculators isn't uncommon. but mr. savaiko expects stepped-up producer selling at around the $1,040 to $1,050 level. he also noted that a strong sterling market yesterday might have helped cocoa in new york as arbitragers took advantage of the currency move. sandra kaul, research analyst at shearson lehman hutton, said the market pushed higher mainly in anticipation of a late harvest in the ivory coast, a major cocoa producer.
rockwell international corp. bought out ikegai corp. 's interest in ikegai-goss, a joint venture of the two companies based in tokyo. the price was 3.6 billion yen ($25 million). the agreement provides that ikegai corp. will remain a supplier to ikegai-goss, which makes printing presses for the newspaper industry. the purchase was made by rockwell graphic systems, a chicago subsidiary of the el segundo, calif., concern. ikegai-goss, which has about 200 employees, is among the industry leaders in keyless inking technology, which reduces time and materials waste when preparing a press for printing.
the bond market, which sometimes thrives on bad news, cheered yesterday's stock market sell-off and perceptions that the economy is growing weaker. early in the day, bonds rose modestly on economists' forecasts that this week's slate of economic data will portray an economy headed for trouble. such news is good for bonds because economic weakness sometimes causes the federal reserve to lower interest rates in an effort to stimulate the economy and stave off a recession. for example, today the department of commerce is scheduled to release the september durable goods report. the consensus forecast of 14 economists surveyed by dow jones capital markets report is for a 1.2% drop in september orders. that would follow a 3.9% advance in august. bonds received a bigger boost later in the day when stock prices moved broadly lower. the dow jones industrial average fell 26.23 points to 2662.91. "bond investors have been watching stocks closely," said joel marver, chief fixed-income analyst at technical data global markets group. "when you get a big sell-off in equities, money starts to shift into bonds," which are considered safer, he said. the treasury's benchmark 30-year bond ended about 1/2 point higher, or up about $5 for each $1,000 face amount, while the yield slid to 7.93% from 7.98% friday. municipals ended mixed, while mortgage-backed and investment-grade corporate bonds rose. prices of high-yield, high-risk corporate securities ended unchanged. in more evidence of the growing division between "good" and "bad" junk bonds, a $150 million issue by imo industries inc. was snapped up by investors while underwriters for beatrice co. 's $350 million issue are considering restructuring the deal to attract buyers. in the treasury market, analysts expect bond prices to trade in narrow ranges this week as the market takes in positive and negative news. "on the negative side, the market will be affected by constant supply in all sectors of the market," said william m. brachfeld, economist at daiwa securities america inc. "on the other hand, we have economic news that is {expected to be} relatively positive for the bond market. we will go back and forth with a tilt toward slightly lower yields," he said. today, the treasury will sell $10 billion of new two-year notes. tomorrow, resolution funding corp., a division of a new government agency created to bail out the nation's troubled thrifts, will hold its first bond auction at which it will sell $4.5 billion of 30-year bonds. so far, money managers and other bond buyers haven't shown much interest in the refcorp bonds. analysts have mixed views about the two-year note auction. while some say the auction should proceed smoothly, others contend that yesterday's sale of $2.58 billion of asset-backed securities by ford motor credit corp. may have siphoned some potential institutional buyers from the government's note sale. the division of auto maker ford motor co. made its debut in the asset-backed securities market with the second-largest issue in the market's four-year history. the company offered securities backed by automobile loans through an underwriting group headed by first boston corp. the issue yields 8.90% and carries a guarantee covering 9% of the deal from the company. first boston sweetened the terms from the original yield estimate in an apparent effort to place the huge offering. the issue was offered at a yield nearly one percentage point above the yield on two-year treasurys. the only asset-backed deal larger than ford's was a $4 billion offering by general motors acceptance corp. in 1986. treasury securities treasury bonds were 1/8 to 1/2 point higher yesterday in light trading. the benchmark 30-year bond ended at a price of 102 3/32, compared with 101 17/32 friday. the latest 10-year notes were quoted late at 100 17/32 to yield 7.90%, compared with 100 3/32 to yield 7.97%. the latest two-year notes were quoted late at 100 28/32 to yield 7.84%. short-term rates rose yesterday at the government's weekly treasury bill auction, compared with the previous bill sale. the treasury sold $7.81 billion of three-month bills with an average discount rate of 7.52%, the highest since the average of 7.63% at the auction on oct. 10. the $7.81 billion of six-month treasury bills were sold with an average discount rate of 7.50%, the highest since the average of 7.60% at the oct. 10 auction. the rates were up from last week's auction, when they were 7.37% and 7.42%, respectively. here are auction details: rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value. thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it. the percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon-equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year. both issues are dated oct. 26. the 13-week bills mature jan. 25, 1990, and the 26-week bills mature april 26, 1990. corporate issues investment-grade corporates closed about 1/4 point higher in quiet trading. in the junk bond market, imo industries' issue of 12-year debentures, considered to be one of the market's high-quality credits, was priced at par to yield 12%. peter karches, managing director at underwriter morgan stanley & co., said the issue was oversubscribed. "it's a segmented market, and if you have a good, strong credit, people have an appetite for it," he said. morgan stanley is expected to price another junk bond deal, $350 million of senior subordinated debentures by continental cablevision inc., next tuesday. in light of the recent skittishness in the high-yield market, junk bond analysts and traders expect other high-yield deals to be sweetened or restructured before they are offered to investors. in the case of beatrice, salomon brothers inc. is considering restructuring the reset mechanism on the $200 million portion of the offering. under the originally contemplated terms of the offering, the notes would have been reset annually at a fixed spread above treasurys. under the new plan being considered, the notes would reset annually at a rate to maintain a market value of 101. price talk calls for the reset notes to be priced at a yield of between 13 1/4% and 13 1/2%. mortgage-backed securities activity in derivative markets was strong with four new real estate mortgage investment conduits announced and talk of several more deals in today's session. the federal national mortgage association offered $1.2 billion of remic securities in three issues, and the federal home loan mortgage corp. offered a $250 million remic backed by 9% 15-year securities. part of the reason for the heavy activity in derivative markets is that underwriters are repackaging mortgage securities being sold by thrifts. traders said thrifts have stepped up their mortgage securities sales as the bond market has risen in the past two weeks. in the mortgage pass-through sector, active issues rose but trailed gains in the treasury market. government national mortgage association 9% securities for november delivery were quoted late yesterday at 98 10/32, up 10/32; and freddie mac 9% securities were at 97 1/2, up 1/4. the ginnie mae 9% issue was yielding 8.36% to a 12-year average life assumption, as the spread above the treasury 10-year note widened slightly to 1.46 percentage points. municipals a $575 million san antonio, texas, electric and gas system revenue bond issue dominated the new issue sector. the refunding issue, which had been in the wings for two months, was one of the chief offerings overhanging the market and limiting price appreciation. but alleviating that overhang failed to stimulate much activity in the secondary market, where prices were off 1/8 to up 3/8 point. an official with lead underwriter first boston said orders for the san antonio bonds were "on the slow side." he attributed that to the issue's aggressive pricing and large size, as well as the general lethargy in the municipal marketplace. in addition, he noted, the issue would normally be the type purchased by property and casualty insurers, but recent disasters, such as hurricane hugo and the northern california earthquake, have stretched insurers' resources and damped their demand for bonds. a $137.6 million maryland stadium authority sports facilities lease revenue bond issue appeared to be off to a good start. the issue was oversubscribed and "doing very well," according to an official with lead underwriter morgan stanley. activity quieted in the new york city bond market, where heavy investor selling last week drove yields on the issuer's full faith and credit backed bonds up as much as 0.50 percentage point. foreign bonds japanese government bonds ended lower after the dollar rose modestly against the yen. the turnaround in the dollar fueled bearish sentiment about japan's bond market. the benchmark no. 111 4.6% bond due 1998 ended on brokers' screens at a price of 95.39, off 0.28. the yield rose to 5.38%. west german bond prices ended lower after a day of aimless trading. the benchmark 7% bond due october 1999 fell 0.20 point to 99.80 to yield 7.03%, while the 6 3/4% notes due july 1994 fell 0.10 to 97.65 to yield 7.34%. british government bonds ended slightly higher in quiet trading as investors looked ahead to today's british trade report. the benchmark 11 3/4% treasury bond due 2003/2007 rose 1/8 to 111 21/32 to yield 10.11%, while the 12% issue of 1995 rose 3/32 to 103 23/32 to yield 11.01%.
"the croaker's done gone from the hook -- damn! my language sure goes to pot down here on the coast." the husky blond guide with the aggie cap twists his face in mock fury. "i got to get back to school and straighten out my english." he has two more years at texas a&m. right now he takes people out to fish in the bays behind the barrier islands that curve for hundreds of miles along the eastern coast of texas, enclosing milky green lagoons behind ridges of sand and grassy scrub that rim the deep blue of the gulf beyond. there have been three days of hot, wind-swept rain, and now with the first sun we are after speckled seatrout, which with redfish provides most of the game fishing hereabouts. the little radio fizzes as other boats want to see if we have found any fish -- spotting location is everything in this sport. negative answers crackle back. the fish often are plentiful around the pilings of the old gas wells that dot the flat surface like the remains of sunken ships. we go from one to the other. the sun is hot now though it's only 8 in the morning. the great silver clouds on the horizon build themselves on the pale water. we cruise toward another set of pilings. the guide scoops into a pail and puts a frantically wiggling croaker on the hook. then he casts out. "just wait for that tap-tap, that thump-thump. it comes real gentle before it pulls. don't forget, trout have very soft mouths." the radio queries again. "pickin' one or two," says the guide, chuckling. "you can tell they've got nothin'." a pair of black skimmers zig-zag past close to the surface. soon we have our limit of the shimmering fish stippled in rose-gold and black. and we are the first back at the dock, where the great blue herons stand waiting by the cleaning benches. the guide is young and he knows this business but he wants a different life after college, such as working for ibm and wearing a necktie. this must be the last big stretch of the american seacoast that is "undeveloped." there are a few ramshackle fishing towns with quiet atolls of resort houses nearby. people are not apt to be self-conscious about the place or themselves. texas is big and beautiful and they live here, that's all. jutting out just to the north of us is the blackjack peninsula (after the oak, not the game) which forms the core of the aransas wildlife refuge. it is famous as the winter home of the whooping crane, that symbol of the destruction of wild america. last year a gunner shot a whooper by mistake thinking that it was a snow goose. he paid an immense fine and was lucky, according to a local wag, to escape the gas chamber. the peninsula comes off the vast southeastern alluvial plain with fields of rice and cotton and sorghum as far as the eye can see. near the coast there are dense coverts of live oak interspersed with marshes and prairies. deer, wild hog, armadillos and alligators are the glamour quadrupeds and the birds are innumerable, especially the herons and the spoonbills. above the blossoms of lantana and scarlet pea the inky-brown and golden palamedes butterfly floats on its lazy wingbeat. inland a few miles from the refuge there is a place called tivoli, with a white church, a gas station and a grocery, the houses relatively close together for such a settlement in these parts. "tivoli motel," i read a sign in the usual pronunciation of the name as we whoosh through. "here in south texas we say tie-vole-ee," my host gently corrects. mr. king is the director of the foreign press center in new york.
aeg ag and siemens ag said they will launch their previously announced joint venture for power semiconductors in january. the two west german electronics concerns said they have set up european power semiconductor co. to merge their activities in the field. aeg and siemens each will hold a 50% stake in the venture. the joint venture will have nominal capital of 50 million marks ($26.9 million) and 700 employees. it will develop, produce and market high-performance electronic parts. siemens is west germany's largest electronics group. aeg is 80% owned by daimler-benz ag, the country's biggest industrial concern.
norimasa furuta, president of japan's mazda motor corp., said the japanese car maker is planning joint production with ford motor co. in europe ahead of the european community's 1992 integration. mr. furuta didn't disclose further details of the arrangement at a news conference, but said the project would be undertaken with ford's european subsidiary. a ford official confirmed in tokyo that the u.s. motor vehicle maker is studying such an arrangement.
at age eight, josephine baker was sent by her mother to a white woman's house to do chores in exchange for meals and a place to sleep -- a place in the basement with the coal. at age 19, she was a paris sensation, transformed from unwanted child to international sex symbol in just over a decade. it is the stuff of dreams, but also of traumas. only the bravest spirits survive such roller coasters. and, for ms. baker, the ride was far from over. her bare breasts, her dancing, her voice, her beauty and, perhaps most famously, her derriere, were prominent attractions, but courage of a rare sort made her remarkable life possible. bricktop, another american black woman who found a measure of fame in paris, said: "i don't think i've ever known anyone with a less complicated view of life, or whose life was more complicated than josephine's." men were a constant complication. baker had lots of them. but she didn't trust them and didn't reward trust. as she saw one key love affair, the problem wasn't her infidelity, it was his jealousy. her appetite for children also was large. she adopted 12 of assorted races, naming them the rainbow tribe, and driving her husband first to despair and then to argentina. she made money, but spent more. friends pitched in. finally, prince rainier and princess grace saved her with the offer of a house in monaco. another lifelong complication, as phyllis rose makes clear in "jazz cleopatra: josephine baker in her time" (doubleday, 321 pages, $22.50), was racism. baker had the good luck to arrive in 1925 paris, where blacks had become exotic. african art was in vogue and some intellectuals were writing breathlessly of a dawning age to be inspired by blacks. to be exotic was to be patronized as well as prized, but for the most part paris was a friendly island in a racist world. baker had bitter experience of bigotry from her st. louis childhood and her days in new york theater, where she was judged too dark for an all-black chorus line (performing of course for all-white audiences). paris loved her at first sight. "she just wiggled her fanny and all the french fell in love with her," sniffed the literary world's maria jolas, not entirely inaccurately. "one can hardly overemphasize the importance of her rear end," ms. rose writes. ms. rose, who teaches literature at wesleyan university, quickly proceeds to overemphasize, claiming that baker's dancing "had uncovered a new region for desire" and thereby ignoring centuries of tributes to the callipygous. "jazz cleopatra" contains other, more important, false notes that undermine what is, for the most part, a lively account of a life already familiar from earlier works. it is easy to see why baker, a free spirit who broke many of the restraints convention places on women, attracts ms. rose, the author of "parallel lives," a wonderful study of victorian marriage. still, even the title raises questions about the author's vision of her subject. baker's art was jazz only by the widest stretch of the term. to find parallels, other than sexual appeal, with cleopatra, requires an equal stretch. baker was 68 years old when she died in paris, two days after the sold-out opening of her newest show: a movie-like ending to what was a cinematic life. in fact, ms. baker played scenes in casablanca that could have made it into "casablanca." during world war ii, her uncomplicated view of life led her to the conclusion that the nazis were evil and must be resisted, a decision made by only about 2% of french citizens. she was devoted to charles de gaulle's cause, accepting great financial sacrifice and considerable risk to become first a spy and then a one-woman uso tour for the forces of free france. in humphrey bogart's nightclub, victor laszlo leads free french sympathizers in "la marseillaise" to drown out the nazis. the night the germans occupied all of france, baker performed in casablanca. the free french wore black arm bands, and when she sang "j'ai deux amours" they wept. ms. rose is best on the early years and world war ii. in her introduction, ms. rose writes that she feels she has much in common with baker, but as "jazz cleopatra" goes on, it seems more rushed, as though the author were growing less interested. it doesn't help that sometimes ms. rose's language fails to deliver the effect she appears to want. one chapter opens: "world war ii was not one of france's glorious moments." elsewhere, in an attempt to explain without stating it plainly that baker had a large gay following later in her career when she was an overdressed singer rather than underdressed dancer, ms. rose writes: "she was a female impersonator who happened to be a woman." one devoted fan who fell under baker's spell in 1963 and began collecting baker memorabilia was bryan hammond. in "josephine baker" (jonathan cape, 304 pages, $35), which was published in britain last year and distributed in the u.s. this month, mr. hammond has used his collection to produce an album of photographs and drawings of the star. the text by patrick o'connor is a tough read, but the pictures make her magnetism clear and help explain why ernest hemingway called baker "the most sensational woman anybody ever saw. or ever will." mr. lescaze is foreign editor of the journal.
manville, having rid itself of asbestos, now sells fiberglass, forest products, minerals and industrial goods. heady stuff it's not. but manville's ownership is unusual, and it has caught the eye of some canny -- and patient -- investors. the denver-based concern, which emerged from bankruptcy-law proceedings late last year, is controlled by the manville personal injury settlement trust. the trust, which owns 80% of manville's stock on a fully diluted basis, is a separate legal entity that is settling claims with asbestos victims. when and if the trust runs out of cash -- which seems increasingly likely -- it will need to convert its manville stock to cash. but as an 80% owner, if it tried to sell much of its stock in the market, it would likely depress the price of its shares. some investors say there is a good chance that the trust will, instead, seek to convert the company's shares to cash, in some sort of friendly restructuring that wouldn't involve just dumping stock on the market. "their principal asset is manville common stock," says jeffrey halis, who runs sabre associates, an investment fund that owns manville shares. "if they tried to sell, they'd be chasing their own tail. what makes the most sense is to find someone who wants to buy the whole company or cause a recapitalization of all shares." the trust isn't commenting on when it might need to liquefy its manville stock. however, the trust's cash flow from investments is far short of its payments to asbestos victims. its cash and liquid securities fell by $338 million in the first six months of 1989. the trust also will receive $75 million a year starting in 1991 on a bond it holds from manville. and, beginning in 1992, it will have a claim on as much as 20% of manville's annual net income. even so, the trust would seem to be facing a cash crunch. as of june 30, it had settled only about 15,000 of the 81,000 received claims from asbestos victims, for an average of $40,424 each. (the average should drop over time, since the most expensive claims are being settled first). and as of midyear, settled but unpaid claims amounted to $136 million -- more than half the trust's total of $268 million in cash and marketable securities. "at some point, we're going to need an infusion of funds," a person close to the trust says. even before then, the trust may be eager to unload manville stock. it doesn't pay a dividend, and this trust needs income. moreover, with 88% of its assets tied up in manville, the trust is badly in need of diversification. "obviously, a diversified portfolio would have less risk," the person close to the trust says. manville itself doesn't rule out a restructuring. though the ink is barely dry on its new, post-bankruptcy law structure, bill bullock, manville's head of investor relations, says the company is continually pondering "whether there is a better way to be structured. we understand that the trust is ultimately going to need to sell some of our shares," he says. of course, one option would be for manville to buy out the trust's shares -- which would do little to benefit public stockholders. but the trust, in most cases, is forbidden from seeking a buyer for only its shares before november 1993. and both the trust and manville are seeking to avoid the bad publicity that, in the asbestos era, tarred the manville name. thus, analysts say, the trust is unlikely to do anything that would hurt manville's other shareholders. "this is a rare case of a company with a big majority holder which will probably act in the interests of the minority holders," one investor says. even if there is no restructuring, manville seems to be attractive long-term. its stock, at 9 5/8, trades at about 8 1/2 times estimated 1989 earnings -- an appropriately low multiple for a company with recession-sensitive customers. mr. bullock says 45% of revenues are tied to construction. analysts predict little or no near-term growth. they are, nonetheless, high on manville's management. "it's one of the best in the business," says salomon brothers analyst stephen dobi. and he says manville has the financial flexibility to buy other companies at the best possible moment when other construction-related firms are hurting and selling cheap. with a conservative debt-to-equity ratio of 1-to-1 -- and $329 million in cash -- manville is indeed actively on the prowl. so far, as a price-conscious shopper, manville hasn't bought much. paul kleinaitis, an analyst at duff & phelps, says, "even though they have borrowing power, they have been disciplined about acquisitions." and mr. kleinaitis says that with 80% of its stock in friendly hands, manville is the rare publicly traded company that can ignore short-term stock fluctuations and plan for the long haul. manville (nyse; symbol: mvl) business: forest products and roofing year ended dec. 31, 1988: sales: $2.06 billions net loss: $1.30 billion* third quarter, sept. 30, 1989: per-share earnings: 30 cents vs. 44 cents** average daily trading volume: 74,351 shares common shares outstanding: 120 million *includes $1.29 billion extraordinary charge. **year ago figure is restated.
emerson electric co. and robert bosch g.m.b. h. said the federal trade commission has requested additional information from the two companies about their announced intention to acquire vermont american corp. for $40 a share, or about $440 million. yesterday, in composite trading on the american stock exchange, vermont american common closed at $39.75, off 25 cents. the ftc's request was "not unusual" and emerson will make a "full and prompt" response, according to a spokesman. spokesmen for emerson and vermont american, which has agreed to be acquired, said they don't anticipate "any problems" with the completion of the transaction. an ftc spokesman said the matter is "in a non-public posture at this time" and declined to comment further. emerson and bosch, through their joint acquisition arm, maple acquisition, have begun a cash tender offer for all of vermont's common shares outstanding. the offer, set to expire nov. 1, may be extended pending the timing and resolution of the ftc request, the companies said. st. louis-based emerson and stuttgart-based bosch make electrical and electronic products, including power tools. the vermont american acquisition is designed to enhance their position in the accessories portion of the power-tool industry.
santa fe pacific corp. is preparing a plan to sell a 20% stake in its large real estate unit to a california public employee pension fund for $400 million, after which it would spin off the realty operation to shareholders. the plan places an indicated value on the real estate operation, santa fe pacific realty corp., of $2 billion. santa fe pacific directors are expected to review the plan at a meeting today, according to people familiar with the transaction. if approved, the sale is expected to close by year's end, with the spinoff occurring by the end of 1992. in composite trading on the new york stock exchange yesterday, santa fe pacific closed at $20.625, down 25 cents. santa fe pacific realty is a major california land and building owner whose prime properties include 1,850 undeveloped acres in the san francisco bay area, and several office sites. a spokesman said the properties survived without significant damage in last week's northern california earthquake. as a result of the partial sale and spinoff, the $56 billion california public employees retirement system would obtain two seats on the board of the real estate operation, according to officials of the fund, who described the plan. a spokesman for chicago-based santa fe pacific confirmed that negotiations were being held with the fund. also holding two seats each on the board, they said, would be olympia & york developments ltd., controlled by the reichmann family of canada, and itel corp., controlled by chicago businessman sam zell. the reichmanns and mr. zell, the largest holders of santa fe pacific stock, have been looking for ways to raise the value of their investments, including possible spinoffs. itel bought a 17% stake in sante fe pacific last year and olympia & york later purchased about a 20% stake; they would have interests in the new realty company in line with their holdings in sante fe pacific. the sale and spinoff of the real estate unit is the first phase of what could lead to the breakup of santa fe pacific into free-standing companies for its railroad and energy operations, as well as real estate. the debt-laden parent has been under pressure from large shareholders to boost the company's share price. at the same time it has been caught in an earnings squeeze. the california pension fund's planned investment in the real estate unit is unusual. pension funds rarely own as much as a 20% stake in what is expected to be a publicly traded company. in addition, pension funds are rarely given seats on company boards and most often try to avoid them because of legal concerns. but fund officials said the santa fe pacific realty investment provides an opportunity to buy a stake in a large real estate portfolio heavily weighted with california properties. it also marks a "major commitment to {real estate} development, which we haven't been involved with before," said dale hanson, the fund's executive director. under the proposed plan, the fund would also lend santa fe pacific realty $75 million in the form of a note that would be convertible into additional shares of the realty company after the second year at the then-prevailing market price. the note would accrue interest at the rate of 13.5% a year, which would be payable to the fund after five years, according to stephen e. roulac, a real estate consultant working for the fund. the purpose of the note is to provide added capital for the spun-off company in a form that will save it spending cash on immediate interest payments, mr. roulac said. the spun-off concern "clearly will be one of the dominant real estate development companies with a prime portfolio," he said. for the last year, santa fe pacific has redirected its real estate operations toward longer-term development of its properties, hurting profits that the parent had generated in the past from periodic sales from its portfolio. real estate operating income for the first nine months fell to $71.9 million from $143 million a year earlier, the company said. in a statement late yesterday, santa fe pacific's chairman, robert d. krebs, said that santa fe pacific realty would repay more than $500 million in debt owed to the parent before the planned spinoff. that would help reduce santa fe pacific's remaining debt to about $600 million from a high of $3.7 billion in early 1988. it wasn't clear where santa fe pacific expected to obtain the payment of more than $500 million, which would be well above the $400 million that california pension fund officials say they plan to provide. the realty unit might take on new debt or obtain additional investors, among other possibilities. the santa fe pacific spokesman declined to comment on that aspect, saying the deal was still under negotiation. santa fe pacific realty owns 2.8 million acres of property, including 219 buildings with more than 11 million square feet of space. it also holds nearly 40,000 acres of raw land with development potential, but under a previously announced strategy, the company has targeted building on 5,400 acres in california, arizona and the chicago area. among those are the 1,850 acres in the san francisco bay area, including 208 acres in the mission bay area. the california pension fund, which has $16 billion already invested in real estate and mortgages, could be a valuable funding source for that development, although it isn't obliged to make further investments. the fund is the nation's largest public employee fund, and it has a growing cash flow now topping $3 billion a year. fund officials negotiated the final structure of the proposed deal with santa fe pacific, but they were approached with the idea by real estate brokers jmb realty corp. of chicago. jmb officials are expected to be hired to represent the pension fund on the santa fe pacific realty board, mr. roulac said, to insulate the fund from potential liability problems.
westamerica bancorp. said richard w. decker resigned as president and chief executive officer after only a year on the job because of "differences" with the board. the banking company couldn't be reached to comment beyond a written announcement. it didn't specify the nature of the differences, saying only that they related to "management style" and "strategic objectives." westamerica said mr. decker's posts were assumed by david payne, westamerica's chairman, who at 34 years of age becomes one of the youngest chief executives of a sizable bank in the country. mr. decker is about 45 years old. neither mr. payne nor mr. decker could be reached to comment. westamerica has about $1.3 billion of assets and is the largest independent bank in northern california. it controls about 35% of the affluent marin county market across the golden gate bridge from san francisco. mr. decker's resignation surprised many industry officials. he was brought to the company in september 1988 after 15 years at los angeles-based first interstate bancorp. the bank had been suffering in late 1987 from a slew of bad real estate loans made in arizona. when he was hired, mr. payne lauded mr. decker's "extraordinary . . . skills" and his "outstanding reputation as one of the west's brightest bankers." though the bank isn't performing as well as some of its competitors in the lucrative california market, its condition has improved since mr. decker took over. for the six months ended june 30, it earned $3.1 million, or 61 cents a share, compared with net income of $2.4 million, or 41 cents a share, a year earlier. its stock also has risen lately, at least partly because it is considered a possible takeover candidate. interstate banking is scheduled to begin in california in 1991, and larger california banks, such as wells fargo & co., have been paying fat premiums to buy smaller banks to control markets before any out-of-state banks enter the fray. in american stock exchange composite trading yesterday, westamerica closed at $22.25 a share, down 75 cents.
varian associates inc., palo alto, calif., reported fiscal fourth-quarter profit plunged more than 95% to $1 million, or five cents a share, from $24.2 million, or $1.10 a share, in the year-earlier quarter. the diversified electronics company blamed the decline in the quarter ended sept. 29, on previously reported operating problems in its electron devices & systems group. for the full fiscal year, varian posted a 13% profit rise to $31.5 million, or $1.53 a share, up from $27.8 million, or $1.27 a share, last year. sales for the year rose almost 15% to $1.34 billion from $1.17 billion last year. a profit last year in both the quarter and year included a net gain of $9.6 million, or 44 cents a share, from the sale of a division. additionally, the full-year profit last year reflected an after-tax restructuring charge of $22.8 million, or $1.04 a share. shares of varian, which last month warned there would be a fourth-quarter plunge, closed at $22.75, down 62.5 cents in composite trading on the new york stock exchange. sales rose 18% in the fiscal fourth quarter to $364.1 million from $307.9 million on the strength in semiconductors and other products.
in a last-ditch effort to keep its sales force and customer base, integrated resources inc. said it agreed in principle to transfer ownership of its broker-dealer subsidiary to two of its top executives. the financial-services firm, struggling since summer to avoid a bankruptcy-law filing after missing interest payments on about $1 billion of debt, will retain the right to regain the subsidiary. it said it will exercise that right only if it sells substantially all of its other core businesses. it also can sell the right to regain the subsidiary to another party. also, the broker-dealer subsidiary, integrated resources equity corp., was renamed royal alliance associates inc. because of integrated's widely reported troubles, the unit's representatives had been requesting a name change. royal alliance, to which the 3,900 representatives' licenses will be transferred, is a shell company integrated owns. in the transaction, integrated will transfer 100% ownership of the subsidiary to gerard m. lavin, executive vice president of integrated and head of back-office operations at the subsidiary, and gary w. krat, executive vice president of the parent and president of the subsidiary. integrated will pump $3.5 million to $4 million into royal alliance as initial funding. in an interview, mr. krat said that based on criteria yet to be determined, he expects to distribute 49% of royal alliance to the representatives, who sell integrated's insurance and mutual-fund products. if integrated regains royal alliance, the representatives will retain their 49% ownership. mr. krat indicated that completion of the transaction could take several weeks, and it wasn't immediately clear what would happen to the broker-dealer subsidiary if integrated files for bankruptcy-law protection in the meantime. the subsidiary isn't expected to be profitable for at least one year. if integrated regains the unit, it would receive any profit the unit reports, even while the unit is independent. if the deal closes, the two officers will draw salaries from the independent operation, not from integrated. many aspects of the agreement were worked out wednesday in chicago, when integrated senior managers met with about 150 representatives. "i think it was something that we and they thought was constructive," said stephen d. weinroth, chairman and co-chief executive officer of integrated. integrated made its announcement after the market closed. in new york stock exchange composite trading, integrated shares closed at $1.125, up 12.5 cents.
the dollar weakened in indecisive trading as foreign-exchange dealers awaited fresh economic news that they hope will jolt the u.s. unit out of its narrow ranges. the canadian dollar climbed to its highest level against the u.s. dollar since late august, prompting the bank of canada to sell the canadian currency on the market. traders say that after a week of nervously tracking every development on wall street, the foreign-exchange market has settled back to catch its breath ahead of new u.s. economic data. they noted, however, that a 26-point drop in the dow jones industrial average gave the dollar a sharp nudge downward late in the day. in late new york trading yesterday, the dollar was quoted at 1.8470 marks, down from 1.8578 marks late friday, and at 141.90 yen, down from 142.43 yen late friday. sterling was quoted at $1.6030, up from $1.5885 late friday. in tokyo tuesday, the u.s. currency opened for trading at 141.80 yen, down from monday's tokyo close of 142.40 yen. the market's attention is especially focused on a preliminary report on the u.s. third-quarter gross national product, due out thursday, which could show the economy is continuing to expand at a relatively brisk pace. the consensus view on real gnp, the total value of the u.s. output of goods and services adjusted for inflation, calls for a 2.3% gain on an annual basis, slowing somewhat from the second quarter's 2.5%, but still fairly strong. few market participants expect the u.s. unit to rally sharply on the news, if it turns out as expected. many contend that the report may overstate the economy's health and predict the third-quarter figures may be the last vigorous statistics for some time to come. "everyone is waiting for gnp," says walter simon, an assistant treasurer with bank julius baer & co. "yet even a relatively strong number -- 2.8% to 2.9% -- won't alter the market's view that the economy is softening." hubert pedroli, managing director of foreign exchange at credit suisse in new york, adds, "the market sees this as the last piece of good news." mr. pedroli notes that the gnp deflator, a measure of inflation, is expected to slow, which would give the federal reserve more room to ease key u.s. rates. analysts predict a 3.5% rise in the deflator, after climbing 4.6% in the second quarter. they note that when an unexpectedly sharp widening in the u.s. trade gap in august was reported earlier this month, hopes for a sustained narrowing of the trade deficit were dashed and sentiment gripped the market that the u.s. economy was losing its momentum. a 190-point plunge in u.s. stock shares compounded the view, they say. "everyone is extremely convinced the economy is slowing," says one senior new york dealer. "if we're not headed for a recession, we're certainly headed for a major slowdown." while the market expects little reaction from news of u.s. durable goods orders, scheduled for release today, participants note that the figures will probably serve to reinforce this bearish sentiment. u.s. durable goods orders are expected to show a decline of 1.2% in september, according to economists. the anticipated drop follows a 3.9% rise in august. traders, however, are quick to point out that while there is little enthusiasm for buying dollars, the u.s. unit has found a "natural bottom" at about 1.85 marks and 140 yen. its resilience around these levels is pegged to persistent investor demand for the greenback, especially in japan. on the commodity exchange in new york, gold for current delivery settled at $367 an ounce, down 30 cents. estimated volume was a very light one million ounces. in early trading in hong kong tuesday, gold was quoted at $366.79 an ounce.
liz claiborne inc., new york, said its third-quarter net income jumped 62%, citing continued strength in apparel sales and the start of shipments of its new product lines: a men's fragrance, large-size women's apparel and casual knitwear. the big apparel maker and retailer said that its net income in the latest quarter increased to $51.1 million, or 58 cents a share, from $31.7 million, or 36 cents a share, a year earlier. sales in the quarter gained 29% to $410.4 million from $317.7 million a year earlier. claiborne shares closed yesterday at $25.125, up 50 cents, in national over-the-counter trading. claiborne's directors also declared its regular cash dividend payment of five cents a share payable on dec. 5 to shareholders of record at the close of business on nov. 13. for the nine months, net income rose 48% to $124.2 million, or $1.41 a share, from $83.8 million, or 96 cents a share a year earlier. sales gained 16% to $1.03 billion from $894 million.
tokyo stocks closed firmer monday, with the nikkei index making its fifth consecutive daily gain. stocks also rose in london, while the frankfurt market was mixed. in tokyo, the nikkei index added 99.14 to 35585.52. the index moved above 35670 at midmorning, nearly reaching the record of 35689.98 set sept. 28. but the market lost part of the early gains on index-linked investment trust fund selling. in early trading in tokyo tuesday, the nikkei index rose 1.08 points to 35586.60. on monday, traders noted that some investors took profits against the backdrop of the nikkei's fast-paced recovery following its plunge last monday in reaction to the oct. 13 drop in new york stock prices. but overall buying interest remained strong through monday, with many observers saying they expect the nikkei to continue with moderate gains this week. turnover remained relatively small. volume on the first section was estimated at 600 million shares, down from 1.03 billion shares friday. the tokyo stock price index of first section issues was up 7.81 at 2687.53. relatively stable foreign currency dealings monday were viewed favorably by market players, traders said. but institutional investors may wait a little longer to appraise the direction of the u.s. monetary policy and the dollar, traders said. hiroyuki wada, general manager of the stock department at okasan securities, said monday's trading was "unfocused." he said investors were picking individual stocks based on specific incentives and the likelihood of a wider price increase over the short term. the selective approach blurred themes such as domestic-demand issues, large-capitalization issues or high-technology shares, which had been providing at least some trading direction over the past few weeks, mr. wada said. investors took profits on major construction shares, which advanced last week, shifting their attention to some midsize companies such as aoki corp., tobishima and maeda. aoki gained 60 yen to 1,480 yen ($10.40). some pharmaceutical shares were popular on rumors related to new products to be introduced at a cancer conference that opened in nagoya. teijin was up 15 at 936, and kyowa hakko gained 30 to 1,770. mochida advanced 40 to 4,440. fujisawa continued to attract investors because of strong earning prospects stemming from a new immune control agent. fujisawa gained 50 to 2,060. kikkoman was up 30 to 1,600, receiving investor interest for its land property holdings near tokyo, a trader said. london prices closed modestly higher in the year's thinnest turnover, a condition that underscored a lack of conviction ahead of a u.k. balance of payments report tuesday. limited volume ahead of the september trade data showed the market is nervous, but dealers added that the day's modest gains also signaled some support for london equities. they pegged the support largely to anticipation that britain's current account imbalance can't be much worse than the near record deficits seen in july and august. "it's a case of the market being too high to buy and too afraid to sell," a senior dealer with kleinwort benson securities said. "it's better to wait." the financial times 100-share index finished 10.6 points higher at 2189.7. the 30-share index closed 11.6 points higher at 1772.6. volume was 276.8 million shares, beneath the year's previous low of 280.5 million shares sept. 25, the session before the august trade figures were released. analysts' expectations suggest a september current account deficit of #1.6 billion ($2.54 billion), compared with august's #2.0 billion deficit. dealers, however, said forecasts are broadly divergent with estimates ranging between #1 billion and #2 billion. "the range of expectations is so broad," a dealer at another major u.k. brokerage firm said, "the deficit may have to be nearer or above #2 billion for it to have any impact on the market." lucas industries, a british automotive and aerospace concern, rose 13 pence to 614 pence after it said its pretax profit for the year rose 28%. share prices on the frankfurt stock exchange closed narrowly mixed in quiet dealings after recovering most of their early losses. the dax index eased 0.99 point to end at 1523.22 after falling 5.5 points early in the session. brokers said the declines early in the day were partly caused by losses of the ruling christian-democratic union in communal elections in the state of baden-wuerttemberg. the start of a weeklong conference by the ig metall metal worker union in berlin is drawing attention to the impending wage negotiations, which could boost companies' personnel costs next year, they said. but there was little selling pressure, and even small orders at the lower levels sufficed to bring the market back to friday's opening levels. traders said the thin trading volume points to continued uncertainty by most investors following last monday's record 13% loss. the market is still 4% short of its level before the plunge, and analysts aren't sure how long it will take until the dax has closed that gap. but norbert braeuer, chief trader at hessische landesbank girozentrale (helaba), said he expects share prices to move upward in the coming weeks. banking stocks were the major gainers monday amid hope that interest rates have peaked, as deutsche bank and dresdner bank added 4 marks each to 664 marks ($357) and 326 marks, respectively. commerzbank gained 1 to 252.5. auto shares were mixed, as daimler-benz firmed 2 to 723, bayerische motoren werke lost the same amount to 554, and volkswagen inched down 1.4 to 451.6. elsewhere, prices closed higher in amsterdam, lower in zurich, stockholm and milan, mixed in brussels and unchanged in paris. shares closed higher in hong kong, singapore and manila, and were lower in sydney, seoul and taipei. wellington was closed. here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by morgan stanley capital international perspective, geneva. to make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100. the percentage change is since year-end.
enviropact inc. said it entered into an agreement in principle to sell its pump and tank division and drilling division to gsx chemical services for $4 million. the miami-based environmental engineering concern said gsx chemical also will assume about $1.6 million in debt related to those divisions. further, gsx will buy $1 million of enviropact common stock, at $2.625 a share, plus an option to acquire an additional $1.5 million of common at the same price, the company said. in american stock exchange composite trading yesterday, enviropact closed at $3 a share, up 25 cents. enviropact said the two divisions account for about $8 million of the company's $20 million in annual revenue. the transaction is expected to close within about 20 days, the company added. enviropact said the proceeds will be used as working capital for expansion and to pay its existing tax liability of about $1.5 million that was due sept. 15. gsx is a unit of laidlaw transportation ltd. of burlington, canada.
monday, october 23, 1989 the key u.s. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but don't always represent actual transactions. prime rate: 10 1/2%. the base rate on corporate loans at large u.s. money center commercial banks. federal funds: 8 3/4% high, 8 11/16% low, 8 11/16% near closing bid, 8 3/4% offered. reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $1 million or more. source: fulton prebon (u.s.a.) inc. discount rate: 7%. the charge on loans to depository institutions by the new york federal reserve bank. call money: 9 3/4% to 10%. the charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral. commercial paper placed directly by general motors acceptance corp.: 8.50% 2 to 44 days; 8.25% 45 to 69 days; 8.40% 70 to 89 days; 8.20% 90 to 119 days; 8.05% 120 to 149 days; 7.90% 150 to 179 days; 7.50% 180 to 270 days. commercial paper: high-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $1,000: 8.575% 30 days; 8.50% 60 days; 8.45% 90 days. certificates of deposit: 8.09% one month; 8.09% two months; 8.06% three months; 8% six months; 7.94% one year. average of top rates paid by major new york banks on primary new issues of negotiable c.d.s, usually on amounts of $1 million and more. the minimum unit is $100,000. typical rates in the secondary market: 8.60% one month; 8.60% three months; 8.40% six months. bankers acceptances: 8.50% 30 days; 8.32% 60 days; 8.32% 90 days; 8.16% 120 days; 8.05% 150 days; 7.96% 180 days. negotiable, bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order. london late eurodollars: 8 3/4% to 8 5/8% one month; 8 11/16% to 8 9/16% two months; 8 3/4% to 8 5/8% three months; 8 5/8% to 8 1/2% four months; 8 9/16% to 8 7/16% five months; 8 9/16% to 8 7/16% six months. london interbank offered rates (libor): 8 3/4% one month; 8 3/4% three months; 8 9/16% six months; 8 1/2% one year. the average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the london market based on quotations at five major banks. foreign prime rates: canada 13.50%; germany 9%; japan 4.875%; switzerland 8.50%; britain 15%. these rate indications aren't directly comparable; lending practices vary widely by location. results of the monday, october 23, 1989, auction of short-term u.s. government bills, sold at a discount from face value in units of $10,000 to $1 million: 7.52%, 13 weeks; 7.50%, 26 weeks. federal home loan mortgage corp. (freddie mac): posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days. 9.86%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 7.875%, 2% rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. federal national mortgage association (fannie mae): posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days (priced at par). 9.80%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 8.75%, 6/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. merrill lynch ready assets trust: 8.56%. annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days; not a forecast of future returns.
bankers trust new york corp., as expected, reported a third-quarter loss of $1.42 billion, or $17.39 a share, following its $1.6 billion boost in reserves for losses on loans to less-developed countries. the loss compares with net income of $162.1 million, or $2.01 a share, in the year-earlier period. interest income rose 29% to about $1.35 billion from $1.05 billion. the new york bank holding company's assets at sept. 30 climbed to $59.4 billion from $57.9 billion. excluding the increase in loan-loss reserves, bankers trust said third-quarter net income would have increased 11% to $180 million. a number of major banks have posted big losses after sharply increasing loan-loss reserves. most of the loans in question are to third world countries in south america. in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday, bankers trust fell 12.5 cents to $50.50.
bristol-myers squibb co. (new york) -- gerald c. beddall, 47 years old, was named president of the clairol division of this pharmaceuticals and health-care company. he succeeds c. benjamin brooks jr., who will retire nov. 1. mr. brooks declined to give his age, but he said his leaving is a normal retirement. mr. beddall had been executive vice president of the division since april. clairol, which makes hair and skin products, was a division of bristol-myers co. before that company's merger with squibb corp.
annualized interest rates on certain investments as reported by the federal reserve board on a weekly-average basis: a-discounted rate. b-week ended wednesday, october 18, 1989 and wednesday october 11, 1989. c-yields, adjusted for constant maturity.
american telephone & telegraph co. said it will spend $20 million to build a factory in guadalajara, mexico, to make telephone answering machines. construction of the 265,000-square-foot facility will begin next year, with production expected to start in late 1991. when fully operational, the guadalajara factory will employ about 1,500 workers and have annual operating expenses of $5 million to $6 million. an at&t representative said that the guadalajara factory will make a full line of answering machines. at&t already has a factory in matamoros, mexico, to make electrical devices. it also purchases data systems products from a manufacturer based in monterrey.
lucas industries plc, a british maker of industrial parts and systems, reported a 28% rise in pretax profit for the year to july 31, helped in particular by a 32% jump in operating profit at its aerospace division. pretax profit in the latest year climbed to #187.1 million ($297.1 million) from #146.3 million ($232.3 million). profit after taxes and minority interests but before extraordinary items climbed 27% to #143.4 million from #112.5 million, with earnings per share rising to 85.1 pence ($1.35) from 79.4 pence ($1.26). the results were at the upper end of market expectations, which ranged from #185 million to #188 million.
tw services inc. posted a $3.3 million third-quarter net loss, compared with a $24.9 million profit, reflecting $60 million of expenses related to its much-publicized proposed takeover by coniston partners. the per-share loss for the paramus, n.j., food-services concern totaled seven cents, compared with earnings of 51 cents a share a year earlier. revenue rose 5% to $981.7 million from $934.7 million. coniston, a new york investment partnership, awaits a vote by tw's shareholders, scheduled for friday, on coniston's $34-a-share, or $1.66 billion, offer for tw. nine-month net income dropped 47% to $26.3 million, or 54 cents a share, from $49.7 million, or $1.02 a share. revenue rose 6% to $2.79 billion from $2.63 billion.
exxon corp. filed suit against the state of alaska, charging state officials interfered with the oil company's initial efforts to treat last spring's giant oil spill. the action is a counterclaim to a suit filed by alaska in august against exxon and six other oil companies. the state's suit alleges that exxon's response to the spill failed to prevent contamination of hundreds of miles of shoreline along prince william sound. that suit and exxon's countersuit were filed in a state court in anchorage. neither suit lists specific dollar claims, largely because damage assessment hasn't yet been completed. legal strategists say that damage claims against the oil giant and others could well exceed $1 billion. litigation, if not settled out of court, could drag on for years. exxon said in its suit that it will seek reimbursement from the state for that part of the cleanup costs and damage claims it says resulted from the state's conduct. the oil company claims that alaskan officials prevented exxon from spraying dispersant onto the almost 11 million gallons of oil dumped when one of its tankers ran into an underwater reef. craig tillery, an alaska assistant attorney general, said in an interview last night that exxon's accusations "are not new. exxon has made them before, at which point the state demonstrated they were untrue. the state will vigorously defend against any counterclaim." since the spill last march, exxon and the state have been wrangling over whether spraying dispersant on the oil in the first hours after the spill, when the weather was clear and calm, would have helped limit the environmental damage. exxon claims that use of dispersants, which break an oil slick into microscopic droplets, was a crucial part of its immediate-response plan and that state officials banned their use during the two days of fair weather following the spill. the oil company claims that it had permission from the u.s. environmental protection agency prior to the spill to use dispersant during such an incident at the discretion of the u.s. coast guard. the state's opposition to the use of dispersants, exxon says, caused the coast guard "to delay granting permission." alaskan and coast guard officials say exxon's charges aren't relevant because tests conducted during the first two days following the spill showed that the dispersant wasn't working anyway. use of dispersants was approved when a test on the third day showed some positive results, officials said.
meson investment ltd., a vancouver, b.c.-based investment firm, said it raised its stake in verit industries to 8.9% of the common shares outstanding. in a securities and exchange commission filing, meson said it holds 67,400 verit common shares, including net purchases of 8,100 shares bought from oct. 10, 1988, to oct. 11, 1989, for $3.875 to $7 each. meson is the personal holding company of steven morfey, a vancouver securities dealer. he said the transaction was made for investment purposes. officials for sun valley, calif.-based verit couldn't be reached for comment. in composite trading on the american stock exchange, verit closed unchanged yesterday at $3.875 a share.
the house appropriations committee approved an estimated $2.85 billion in emergency funding to assist california's recovery from last week's earthquake and to extend further aid to east coast victims of hurricane hugo. the package was termed excessive by the bush administration, but it also provoked a struggle with influential california lawmakers who sought unsuccessfully to add nearly $1 billion more and waive current restrictions to expedite the distribution of funds. by a 26-7 margin, the committee scuttled the more expensive alternative, and the debate forced a strained confrontation between appropriations committee chairman jamie whitten (d., miss.) and his party's largest state delegation in the house. "i have no regrets about going forward," said rep. vic fazio (d.,calif.), who sought later to play down the sometimes hostile tone of the long evening meeting. "we are the golden state," mr. fazio said, "and there is a certain amount of jealousy." the $2.85 billion package incorporates $500 million for small-business loans, $1 billion in highway construction funds, and $1.35 billion divided between general emergency assistance and a reserve to be available to president bush to meet unanticipated costs from the two disasters. the funding is attached to a stopgap bill to keep most of the government operating through nov. 15. the measure is expected to come before the house today, and congress is under pressure to complete action before midnight edt tomorrow, when the current continuing resolution expires. given california's size and political importance, the white house is eager to appear generous. but in private meetings yesterday, budget director richard darman argued that only $1.5 billion in new federal appropriations are needed to supplement existing resources. a white house budget office analysis estimates that $500 million -- or half the level in the committee bill -- is needed for highway assistance to meet california's needs, and the administration rejects the notion that new appropriations are needed to finance disaster loans by the small business administration. "everybody appreciates that it is a national disaster and that we've got to address it," said mr. darman, who came to the capitol to meet with mr. whitten and california lawmakers before the committee session. "i would hope very much that we wouldn't end up in a kind of situation where you have a bidding war and then a veto threat." although this white house pressure was clearly a factor among committee republicans, no single influence was greater than mr. whitten. a master of pork-barrel politics, he had crafted the $2.85 billion package in vintage style and used the full force of his chairmanship to keep the proposal intact and dismiss any alternative. when mr. fazio offered the california-backed $3.84 billion plan, mr. whitten insisted that the full 14 pages be read aloud by the panel's clerk to underscore the range of legislative changes also sought by the delegation. on the chairman's motion, the california package was subsequently reduced to less-binding report language, and even when this was accepted as such on a voice vote, mr. whitten pointedly opposed it. more important than money in many cases are waivers california is seeking on current restrictions covering federal highway funds, such as a $100 million cap on how much any single state can receive in emergency funds in a year. mr. whitten's package appears to accomplish this purpose, but the state faces more resistance in its bid for an extended waiver on having to put up any matching funds on repairs completed in the next six months. a member in the house leadership and skilled legislator, mr. fazio nonetheless found himself burdened not only by california's needs but by hurricane hugo amendments he accepted in a vain effort to build support in the panel. the california democrat appeared embarrassed by provisions inserted on behalf of owners of private beaches in the virgin islands, and lumber interests sought to add another $100 million in federal aid to plant timber on private land in north and south carolina. california's high-priced real estate puts it in an awkward position, too. one provision last night would have raised the cap on disaster loans to $500,000 from $100,000 per household to accommodate san francisco losses.
kurzweil music systems inc. said it retained kidder, peabody & co. to study financial alternatives, including the possible sale of the financially struggling company. kurzweil, waltham, mass., makes digital electronic keyboard instruments used by professional recording musicians. it recently introduced a line for the home market. however, raymond c. kurzweil, chairman and chief executive, said "the company continues to require additional funding to realize the potential of its technology." in the year's first six months, kurzweil had a loss of $6.9 million on sales of $11.2 million. last month its president, john s. donnelly, resigned citing "management differences" with mr. kurzweil.
amtech systems inc., tempe, ariz., said its preliminary year-end results of operations indicate "substantial improvement" over the previous fiscal year. amtech, which makes an automated process system that improves the yields of semiconductor manufacturers, said profit for the year ended sept. 30 rose to more than $800,000 from $446,000 last year. per-share earnings are estimated at more than 40 cents, up from 22 cents for fiscal 1988. total revenue is expected to double to more than $22 million from $10.8 million. amtech, which also provides technical temporary employment services to aerospace, defense, computer and high-tech companies in the southwest and baltimore-washington areas, said its final audited results are due in late november. the company attributed the improvement to strong demand in the semiconductor equipment segment as well as the acquisition of echelon service co. and the inclusion of a full year's results of operations for rts inc., compared with seven months' results for the prior year.
ldi corp., cleveland, said it will offer $50 million in commercial paper backed by lease-rental receivables. the program matches funds raised from the sale of the commercial paper with small to medium-sized leases. ldi termed the paper "non-recourse financing," meaning that investors would be repaid from the lease receivables, rather than directly by ldi corp. ldi leases and sells data-processing, telecommunications and other high-tech equipment.
shevardnadze admitted that moscow violated the 1972 abm treaty. in a foreign-policy address before the soviet legislature, the foreign minister conceded that the radar station in krasnoyarsk breached the superpower anti-ballistic missile treaty and said it would be dismantled. shevardnadze said it took gorbachev's government four years to determine that the station's location in siberia violated the accord, as western arms-control officials have long contended. he also denounced moscow's nine-year involvement in the war in afghanistan, saying it involved "gross violations of . . . civil norms and ethics." secretary of state baker, in his first major arms-control speech, called for a new military relationship with moscow to reduce "first strike" nuclear arms. bay area commuters battled earthquake-related transportation snarls. travelers crowded into subways, sat in traffic jams on major freeways or waited for buses in the rain, but the massive gridlock anticipated by officials in the san francisco bay area never materialized. as the death toll from last week's temblor climbed to 61, the condition of freeway survivor buck helm, who spent four days trapped under rubble, improved, hospital officials said. rescue crews, however, gave up hope that others would be found alive under the collapsed roadway. the house appropriations committee approved a $2.85 billion aid package for the quake region, less than the $3.8 billion sought by california officials. hungary declared itself a democracy and for the first time openly commemorated the anniversary of the 1956 anti-stalinist uprising that was crushed by the soviet union. a crowd estimated at 100,000 held a torch-lit march through budapest as acting president szuros delivered a nationally televised address rejecting communist dominance. about 200,000 east germans marched in leipzig and thousands more staged protests in three other cities in a fresh challenge to the communist leadership to introduce democratic freedoms. in an east berlin suburb, meanwhile, employees at an electronics plant formed an independent trade union called reform, a worker spokesman said. the space shuttle atlantis landed at a desert air strip at edwards air force base, calif., ending a five-day mission that dispatched the jupiter-bound galileo space probe. the five astronauts returned to earth about three hours early because high winds had been predicted at the landing site. fog shrouded the base before touchdown. explosions shook a phillips petroleum co. plastics plant near pasadena, texas, hurling debris and causing a fire visible from 10 miles away. more than 100 people were injured, and a number of workers were missing. parts of the houston ship channel were closed. the white house said bush is conferring with leaders of the senate intelligence committee to ease differences over guidelines for cia agents. the statement came after officials said bush complained at a private meeting last week that a strict interpretation of a policy requires the u.s. to notify foreign dictators of certain coup plots. lebanon's gen. aoun placed christian military forces on alert in case of renewed fighting with syrian-backed moslems after lebanon's two main shiite militias rejected an arab-sponsored peace accord. the plan, approved by lawmakers and rejected sunday by aoun, includes political changes aimed at ending the 14-year-old civil war. nato defense ministers are expected to call for a reduction in nuclear forces in europe when the alliance's nuclear planning group convenes a two-day session today in portugal. the ministers are to reshape nato's defenses in western europe amid fast-paced changes in the soviet bloc. iran's president rafsanjani offered to help gain freedom for western hostages in lebanon, but said the assistance was contingent on u.s. aid in resolving the cases of three iranians kidnapped in lebanon in 1982 or the release of frozen iranian assets. washington rejected the bid, saying the hostages weren't linked to other issues. plo leader arafat asked egypt to seek clarifications from the u.s. on secretary of state baker's plan for mideast peace talks, an aide to egyptian president mubarak said. the official stressed that the plo hasn't rejected the five-point formula. commonwealth leaders turned to issues ranging from drugs to the world economy after zimbabwe's president mugabe called thatcher's views on south africa "despicable." at a meeting in malaysia, australia and canada also assailed the british prime minister for criticizing the 49-nation group's call for pretoria to ease apartheid.
property capital trust said it dropped its plan to liquidate because it wasn't able to realize the value it had expected. it said it will buy back two million shares, or 18.4%, of the total outstanding, and continue operations buying and managing real estate. property capital, which is based in boston, had told shareholders it expected to distribute at least $21 a share, or $229 million, in a liquidation, based on an expected asset sale price of $290 million or more. the company said it didn't receive an offer it wanted to accept. as a result of dropping the liquidation plan, shareholders will have to treat dividends received this year as ordinary income or capital gains rather than as tax free returns of capital, the company said. the share repurchase will be funded mostly from borrowings.
a.h. belo corp. said its net income was $3.1 million, or 15 cents a share, in the third quarter, more than four times its profit of $663,000, or three cents a share, last year. included in the results was an adjustment to the dallas-based company's tax rate that reduced net income by about 10 cents a share, or approximately $2 million. belo said it increased its effective tax rate to 52% from 47% to account for potential liabilities related to an internal revenue service investigation of its tax returns for the years 1984 through 1988. the newspaper and television owner said it expects the tax adjustment to reduce its net income for the full year by 14 cents, or approximately $2.8 million based on its 20.2 million shares outstanding. for the third quarter, belo said its revenue increased 11%, to $101.5 million from $91.2 million last year. for the nine months, the company had net income of $15.1 million, or 74 cents a share, up 98% from $7.6 million, or 38 cents a share last year. revenue grew almost 8% to $301.9 million from $279.8 million last year.
a federal judge granted a temporary stay of the california student aid commission's emergency action to stop guaranteeing loans for national technical schools, a unit of united education & software inc. the california student aid commission took the action oct. 15 after a government audit cited national technical schools for having courses too short to be eligible for the educational loan program and having a student drop-out rate far in excess of federal standards, and it alleged other serious violations of law and regulations. united education & software, a los angeles education services company, called the commission's action "precipitous and unwarranted." the court set a hearing on the emergency action for oct. 30. united education & software posted a $250,000 bond against potential losses to the student aid commission and to taxpayers in guaranteeing any more loans for national technical schools students prior to the hearing.
a decline in allied-signal inc. 's automotive business contributed to flat sales and only slightly higher earnings in the third quarter. allied-signal reported that net rose 1.7% to $121 million, or 81 cents a share, from $119 million, or 80 cents a share, the year earlier. sales slipped 1.3% to $2.82 billion from $2.86 billion. for the nine months, the morris township, n.j.-based company, with businesses in aerospace, automotive products and engineered materials, earned $413 million, or $2.77 cents a share, up 15% from $359 million, or $2.40 a share. sales eased 0.2% to $8.88 billion from $8.90 billion. chairman edward l. hennessy jr. said that a drop in sales of auto and truck parts contributed to lower earnings in the automotive unit. he also cited unfavorable foreign-exchange rates and a lower tax rate. earnings for the group declined to $11 million from $33 million last year. earnings at allied-signal's aerospace business rose to $55 million from $41 million a year ago, primarily on higher sales and profit in its engines and auxiliary power units. in new york stock exchange composite trading yesterday, allied-signal shares closed at $35.125, off 87.5 cents.
the national highway traffic safety administration said it will start enforcing stiffer regulations jan. 31 for so-called gray-market imports of vehicles. the regulations, required under legislation enacted by congress last year, will apply to imports of vehicles that weren't built to meet u.s. government auto safety standards and were intended for use in europe or elsewhere abroad. u.s. officials estimated that gray-market imports total about 2,100 units a year, a small part of the more than three million vehicles exported to the u.s. each year. according to the nhtsa, the new regulations will prohibit anyone other than an importer that has registered with the u.s. government, or a person who has a contract with a registered importer, from permanently importing a vehicle that doesn't meet the u.s. auto safety standards. the registered importer would be required to bring such vehicles into compliance with the u.s. safety standards, compared with the current situation in which anyone can bring in such vehicles and modify them to meet the u.s. standards. congress tightened auto safety standards for gray-market imports after u.s. auto dealers, including franchised foreign-car dealers, complained that they often were blamed when the second and third buyers of such vehicles found that the cars couldn't meet u.s. auto safety standards.
legent corp. said it expects to report net income between $6.4 million and $6.9 million, or between 32 cents and 34 cents a share, for its fourth quarter ended sept. 30. in the year-ago quarter, the software developer reported pro forma earnings of $4.8 million, or 24 cents a share. vienna, va.-based legent said it expects to post revenue for the quarter of more than $31 million, compared with pro forma revenue of $25.2 million in 1988. for the fiscal year, the company said it anticipates reporting earnings of $23 million, or about $1.15 a share, including a charge of about $5.9 million, or 22 cents a share, related to the merger that created legent out of duquesne systems inc. and morino inc. in march 1989. revenue for fiscal 1989 is expected to exceed $124 million. pro forma earnings for fiscal 1988 were $19.6 million, or 99 cents a share, on revenue of $97.2 million. the company attributed much of the growth in earnings to increased demand for its systems productivity software.
archive corp. said it expects to report net income for its fiscal year ended sept. 29 of a record $15 million, or $1.15 a share, up 43% from $10.5 million, or 80 cents a share, for the prior year. the costa mesa, calif., maker of computer tape drives also projected record revenue for the year of $181 million, up from $122.7 million for the previous year. archive attributed the gains to strong demand for its products, continued growth of the reseller market and the acquisition of maynard electronics in february, which accounted for about 14% of the company's revenue.
detrex corp. said a reserve it is establishing to cover expected pollution cleanup costs at an ohio plant reduced its third-quarter net income by $1.9 million. detrex, which has annual sales of about $100 million, declined to say if it would post a loss in the third quarter. the southfield, mich.-based company earned $774,000 in the quarter last year. detrex is setting aside $3.1 million for the cleanup, but said the reserve reduced its quarterly income by only $1.9 million because of tax considerations. in addition, the manufacturer said it signed a consent decree with ohio to build a $1.4 million pollution-control facility at the ashtabula chemical manufacturing plant by aug. 1, 1990. detrex said it is one of at least 17 companies notified by the environmental protection agency that they may be potentially responsible for cleaning up the fields brook watershed near detrex's ashtabula plant at a total cost the epa estimates at $48 million -- a figure detrex said the companies dispute.
first executive corp. said about 96% of the rights to purchase its depositary shares and warrants have been exercised. of the 17.6 million rights units issued, just under 17 million were exercised before the oct. 10 expiration of the offering, the insurance holding company said. remaining units will be sold to the underwriters, drexel burnham lambert inc. and kidder, peabody & co., which will also purchase an over-allotment of 2.3 million additional units. first executive said the offering will raise about $299 million -- minus underwriting fees and other expenses -- that the company plans to use to write new life insurance and annuity business. in addition, analysts have viewed the rights offering as a takeover defense that prospectively balloons the number of shares outstanding. each of the units consists of two warrants, each of which could be used to purchase a half-share of common stock, and one depositary preference share. depositary shares are convertible into common stock on a 1-to-1 basis. currently, the company has about 88.1 million common shares outstanding. in over-the-counter trading monday, the stock closed at $10.625, off 37.5 cents.
united air's parent quashed any prospects for an immediate revival of the labor-management buy-out, saying ual should remain independent for now. also, ual chairman stephen wolf pulled out of the buy-out effort to focus on running the company. the two developments leave the airline with several problems, including an unsettled labor situation. stock prices fell and bonds rose as worries mounted about the economy and the junk bond market. the dow jones industrials sank 26.23 points, to 2662.91. the dollar also declined. the turmoil in junk bonds may last for years, investors and traders say. even drexel is pulling back. santa fe pacific plans to sell 20% of its large real estate unit to a california pension fund for $400 million and spin the rest off to shareholders. the proposal values the company's real estate operation at $2 billion. time warner reported a $176 million loss for the third quarter, reflecting the cost of the recent merger and a method of accounting for the deal. thrifts continued to shed assets in august, mainly to comply with stiffer capital rules under the s&l bailout law. also, withdrawals exceeded deposits by $5.1 billion in the month. exxon's profit fell 9% in the third quarter, hurt by sagging results at two of its three main businesses. phillips and arco posted declines. ashland had a loss. amerada hess and occidental petroleum had gains. ogilvy's chairman, kenneth roman, is leaving to take a top post at american express. his resignation follows a hostile takeover of the ad agency in may by wpp of britain. the justice department took steps that could restrict the use by prosecutors of criminal racketeering charges against white-collar defendants. shearson was sued by money manager george soros, who claimed one of his funds was defrauded out of $60 million during stock-index futures trading just after the 1987 crash. drexel's efforts to settle its legal troubles are being resisted by at least 10 states. some may try to revoke the firm's license to sell securities. prime computer plans to dismiss 20% of its work force to cut costs following its recent leveraged buy-out. the action renews concern about buyouts in high-tech industries. paribas plans a bid for another big french financial and industrial firm, navigation mixte, a sign europe's takeover fever hasn't cooled. qintex australia unveiled plans to restructure and sell assets to try to ease its financial problems. union carbide's earnings plunged 35% in the third quarter, reflecting weakness in the company's core chemicals and plastics businesses. japan's daiwa securities named masahiro dozen president. the rapid advance of the 52-year-old executive surprised many at the company. markets -- stocks: volume 135,860,000 shares. dow jones industrials 2662.91, off 26.23; transportation 1236.66, up 5.86; utilities 215.35, off 0.13. bonds: shearson lehman hutton treasury index 3411.08, up commodities: dow jones futures index 129.49, off 0.13; spot index 131.64, up 0.30. dollar: 141.90 yen, off 0.53; 1.8470 marks, off 0.0108.
it was the kind of snubbing rarely seen within the congress, let alone within the same party. sen. alan cranston trekked over to the house side of capitol hill a few days ago and volunteered his testimony to fellow democrat rep. henry gonzalez. it was offered as an expression of cooperation to mr. gonzalez, who is investigating the $2.5 billion failure of lincoln savings & loan association. but instead of thanks, sen. cranston was treated with cool formality. "every witness receives a formal subpoena," rep. gonzalez told him. seldom have house hearings caused so much apprehension in the senate, where california sen. cranston and four other senators were already writhing in the glare of unfavorable publicity over the alleged looting of lincoln by their friend and political benefactor, charles keating jr., principal stockholder of lincoln's parent company, american continental corp. of phoenix, ariz. at the first day of the house banking committee's hearings last week, william seidman, chairman of the resolution trust corp., the federal agency created to sell sick thrifts, said the agency is investigating whether lincoln made illegal political contributions. mr. keating arranged nearly $1 million in donations to sen. cranston and his various political causes, and hundreds of thousands more to other lawmakers. future witnesses include a former federal s&l regulator who has accused the five senators of attempting to "subvert" the regulatory process by intervening on behalf of mr. keating. unlike many lawmakers, chairman gonzalez says he considers intervening with regulators to be improper. "when you reach a point where a policy-making body is trying to shape administrative decisions, then that's a no-no in my book," the texas lawmaker says. and he has attached himself to the lincoln story tenaciously. "unless the questions are answered, i will keep on going." lawmakers often are reluctant to embarrass colleagues, even those of opposing political parties. in the recent housing and urban development department scandal, for example, rep. thomas lantos, the california democrat who led the hearings, tiptoed through embarrassing disclosures about hud grants secured by sen. alfonse d'amato, a new york republican. but chairman gonzalez is a genuine maverick. he comes from the same political line as wright patman, a bank-baiting texas populist who chaired the banking committee until 1974. mr. gonzalez is also a stickler for ethical standards who refuses to accept honorariums and who believes in conducting official business in the open. early in his political career, as a city councilman in san antonio, he walked out of a meeting when political supporters asked that the police chief be replaced, denouncing the closed-door affair publicly as a "bat-roost meeting." the immediate target of rep. gonzalez's inquiry is danny wall, chairman of the office of thrift supervision. as the principal regulator of the thrift industry, mr. wall delayed seizing lincoln s&l for more than two years after his staff told him that the california thrift was insolvent and that potential losses to taxpayers were growing rapidly. rep. gonzalez seems primed to lash out at mr. wall when hearings resume thursday with testimony by two federal regulators from san francisco, william black and mike patriarca. mr. wall relieved them of responsibility for supervising lincoln in 1988. mr. gonzalez expressed concern over a report that the two had been summoned to washington by mr. wall last week to discuss their testimony in advance. "i think he is trying to improperly influence a witness, and by god i'm not going to tolerate it," he says. mr. wall, however, is a self-proclaimed "child of the senate" and former staff director of its banking committee. an inquiry into his handling of lincoln s&l inevitably will drag in sen. cranston and the four others, sens. dennis deconcini (d., ariz.), john mccain (r., ariz.), john glenn (d., ohio) and donald riegle (d., mich.). they all attended a meeting in april 1987 questioning why a federal audit of lincoln s&l had dragged on for two years. "i'm certain that in the course of the hearings the names {of the senators} will be brought out," mr. gonzalez says. this is raising eyebrows. "when i first got a glimpse at the witness list, i couldn't believe that they were going to go ahead and do this," says michael waldman, director of congress watch, a consumer group. "there are some witnesses who will be forced to testify about their meetings with senators." and a democratic aide to a banking committee member remarks, "i too am astounded by it, because gonzalez has certainly placed a lot of democratic senators in a very bad position." all the senators say they merely were trying to ensure fairness for a constituent. mr. keating lives in phoenix, and the california thrift's parent is an ohio-chartered corporation with holdings in michigan. chairman gonzalez expresses sympathy for sen. riegle, his counterpart as chairman of the senate banking committee. "he's wise, he's good and i know he's an honest man," the texan says. but at the same time, mr. gonzalez hasn't forgotten a confrontation over mr. wall during house-senate negotiations over s&l bailout legislation during the summer. the senate negotiators included sens. cranston and riegle and mr. wall's principal sponsor, republican sen. jake garn of utah. they were willing to trade important provisions in the bailout legislation to preserve mr. wall's job and to avoid a reconfirmation hearing in which he would be called upon to testify about lincoln s&l. most importantly, the senate traded away the bush administration's controversial plan to finance the bailout, which was partly reinstated later. at the time, mr. gonzalez said several senators told him that they "could get some roadblocks out of the way if there could be some understanding on garn's insistence on wall." now mr. gonzalez is holding the equivalent of reconfirmation hearings anyway, under the guise of the lincoln investigation. "in a way, that's what this is," mr. gonzalez concedes. even some house banking committee members could suffer from the fallout. mr. keating raised $20,000 for rep. doug barnard's 1986 re-election campaign while the georgia democrat was taking his side against regulators who wanted to curb risky investments and wholesale deposit brokering. he recently voted "present" when the committee authorized a subpoena to compel mr. keating to testify, then changed his vote to yes. but the chairman's supporters have the upper hand as federal regulators press a $1.1 billion fraud suit against mr. keating and others. rep. jim leach (r., iowa) says the lincoln s&l affair is "the biggest bank heist in history," and adds: "the great question that remains to be resolved is whether we have a congressional watergate in the making." a witness set to testify on thursday was quoted in a news report over the weekend as saying lincoln "laundered" campaign contributions illegally. but the witness, william crawford, california's chief state thrift regulator, denies saying that. "i don't know whether it was done properly or not, because i'm not a lawyer, " he said in a telephone interview yesterday. but he said he is prepared to testify that executives of lincoln and its parent corporation got unusually high salaries and frequent calls directing them to make specific contributions. the committee also has summoned mr. wall's predecessor, edwin gray. he has characterized the five senators' roles as "tantamount to an attempt to subvert the . . . regulatory process," and he isn't expected to back down even though the five senators have disputed his account of a 1987 meeting. so the senators must brace themselves. sen. cranston, as he returned to the capital last week from a one-day trip to inspect earthquake damage in san francisco, sighed to an aide: "well, back to keatingland."
when anne volokh and her family immigrated to the u.s. 14 years ago, they started life in los angeles with only $400. they'd actually left the soviet union with $480, but during a stop in italy ms. volokh dropped $80 on a black velvet suit. not surprisingly, she quickly adapted to the american way. three months after she arrived in l.a. she spent $120 she didn't have for a hat. ("a turban," she specifies, "though it wasn't the time for that 14 years ago. but i loved turbans.") since then she has become wealthy. her husband and older son -- a computer prodigy profiled in the wall street journal in 1981, when he was 13 -- run a software company with expected sales this year of $10 million. most recently, she has become the publisher of movieline, a four-year-old los angeles magazine that began national distribution last month, with an initial press run of 100,000 copies. distributed by the hearst corp. 's eastern news, the glossy publication melds vanity fair's gossipy archness and premiere's earnest delving into behind-the-scenes minutiae, with a special emphasis on tinseltown as fashion trendsetter. it's being sold through bookstores, newsstands and some video stores. though ms. volokh is a small woman, she has an outsized personality and dramatic flair that seem perfectly suited to capitalism as it is practiced in hollywood. certainly life for her has changed considerably since the days in kiev, when she lived with her parents, her husband and her two sons in a 2 1/2-room apartment in what she calls "silent internal immigration," dreaming of escape. now, for example, she owns 48 hats. however, she remembers the lean years and recalls with relish wearing her first major american purchase -- that turban -- 10 years later and having a los angeles boutique owner ask her if it was a chanel. with obvious satisfaction, she says she told him: "no darling, i just give it a chanel look." she keeps track of the rest of her hats by stapling polaroid snapshots to the outside of each hatbox. are the hats merely part of her new l.a. persona, along with the many ultra-thin capri cigarettes she smokes, the parties she throws for 500 people, the chekovian feasts she offers guests at her weekend place in santa barbara? "no, darling," she said recently in her fluent, slightly affected english, during a trip east to promote movieline's national expansion. "you have to be born with it. i used to wear hats in russia, but i had to make them and my dresses. on the hat side i wasn't getting what i wanted." now 48 years old, ms. volokh has definite ideas about what she wants. at movieline, she wants "specific paragraphing, specific tone, a specific attitude -- bright and bold and tongue-in-cheek." in restaurants (in this case, the russian samovar, a new york restaurant operated by and for soviet emigres), she didn't want the chirpy, folkish music bouncing through the room. "you people here think this is russian music," she said with disdain, and called over to the waitress: "could you turn it off?" that done, ms. volokh spoke with rampant eloquence about the many attributes she feels she was born with: an understanding of food, business, russian culture, human nature, and parties. "parties are rather a state of mind," she said, pausing only to taste and pass judgment on the georgian shashlik ("a little well done, but very good"). "if you are born to give parties, you give parties. even in russia we managed to give parties. in los angeles, in our lean years, we gave parties." as publisher of a magazine devoted to movies as guideposts for fashion and other fantasies, ms. volokh sees her party-giving as an important part of business. she has thrown extravagant soirees for crowds of people, but prefers more intimate gatherings. "at american cocktail parties everyone's always looking over your shoulder to see who they can talk to next. i like rather tea, because it is at the end of the day." she serves high russian tea, at 5 p.m. "it's supposed to be later but i just moved it. in los angeles, it's important to catch people just after work." she also frequently invites directors, producers, actors, writers and other show business people for "coffee and clips in the pleasure dome." guests bring movies on tape, and show their favorite three-to-five minute segments on the screen that unrolls from the ceiling of the volokhs' art-nouveau library ("the pleasure dome"). they eat "sinful and sensual things" -- and explain their clips. "it's very revealing and soul baring," said ms. volokh. the idea for movieline actually was dreamed up by an old friend of the volokhs, boris krutchensky (who has the title of co-publisher), and laurie halpern smith, now the magazine's co-editor. mr. krutchensky approached ms. volokh five years ago about backing the publication, which started out as a listing guide. she was interested only if she could guide it editorially as well. "anne doesn't believe in blandness," said ms. smith. "she wants things to be exciting. and she has this inexhaustible energy. she'll think of an idea the editorial people think is impossible, then she'll have us make it work." in fact, ms. volokh wasn't just a rich lady who needed a hobby. back in the soviet union she was a respected journalist, writing a weekly column about the national cuisine for sunday izvestia. those columns -- vivid discussions of the cultural and literary reverberations of food as well as practical advice on how to glamorize dreary sovietized meals -- became the basis for her erudite and entertaining cookbook, "the art of russian cuisine," brought out in 1983 by macmillan publishing co. "i don't trust people who don't eat," said ms. volokh, though she herself stopped eating lunch a few years ago to drop 25 pounds. "look at dostoevski and kafka. no one ever eats in their books and look at them. . . . tolstoy's characters eat, pushkin's, gogol's." in her cookbook, which macmillan is bringing out in soft cover this month (with the blini recipe revised so it works), she introduces each chapter with appropriate quotations from russian literature: pushkin on blini, goncharov on piroghi. in life, she offers practical dieting advice: "divide your meals into important and unimportant. in a great restaurant, don't deprive yourself. the other meals don't matter." amusing as she is, and frivolous as she can seem, this is a serious person with some difficult memories. she was the child of relative privilege. her mother was a translator; her father was "the eternal vice director." "i emigrated to wear better hats, do better parties," she said with a giggle. "but we shouldn't leave out political reasons, number one. you try to maintain your dignity under difficult circumstances. one cannot imagine how you live when you live those double and triple lives." by 1973, after their second child was born, it had become clear to ms. volokh and her husband vladimir, a computer scientist, that they wanted to leave the u.s.s.r. ms. volokh quit her job, to remove herself from the public eye. the wait was miserable. before granting ms. volokh's parents a visa, the government required her mother to obtain permission from her first husband, whom she had divorced 38 years earlier. mr. volokh was fired from his job, and had to endure hours of organized verbal abuse from his co-workers, accusations of sabotage and counterrevolutionary activities. the volokhs were afraid that they'd end up like a friend of theirs who'd applied for a visa and waited for 10 years, having been demoted from his profession of theoretical mathematician to shipping clerk. they didn't. their visa came in relatively short order, and they moved to los angeles. mr. volokh soon found work in his field, but ms. volokh refused the obvious and available occupation -as translatorfor a russian who spoke fluent english. "that's always looking back," she said. "i wanted to be in business." on the way to that goal, she received her first u.s. paycheck for proofreading a book of polish poetry, attended secretarial school, then went to work for a fund-raising organization. soon she was running the office. when her husband and son founded their computer company, vesoft, she worked as business manager, bookkeeper and publicist. now movieline is located in the same building as vesoft. "things work out unexpectedly in life," said ms. volokh. "you never know if you'll be chosen to be the scapegoat or the lucky one. we were lucky."
william d. forrester, president of the u.s.-u.s.s.r. trade and economic council, has a warning for u.s. companies trying to do business in the soviet union. "it's an extremely complex market, and you have to be prepared to make a big commitment," mr. forrester says. "we are not trying to encourage everyone." undeterred by such words of caution, corporate america is flocking to moscow, lured by a huge untapped market and mikhail gorbachev's attempt to overhaul the soviet economy. doing business with the russians, once the pursuit of a handful of hardened veterans, has become the goal of such major companies as general motors corp., federal express corp. and procter & gamble co., as well as a cluster of smaller firms. reflecting the new-found interest, more than 140 u.s. companies are taking part in a moscow exhibition organized by mr. forrester's trade group. but while u.s. interest may be big and growing, the difficulties that have stymied deals in the past show no sign of abating. alongside the old problems of a non-convertible currency and an inpenetrable bureaucracy, western business executives must now grapple with new complexities linked to perestroika, the restructuring of the soviet economy. executives say mr. gorbachev's moves to break up the government's foreign trade monopoly have created uncertainties as well as opportunities. changing legislation has opened the field to thousands of inexperienced soviet players, many who promise more than they can deliver. and some foreign firms are finding that even when they manage to overcome such hurdles, their ventures now have to be endorsed by such unpredictable bodies as the soviet parliament and the governments of the nation's republics. "you have to go out to all your constituents," says james h. giffen, who is spearheading the most ambitious attempt by u.s. firms to break into the soviet market, involving investment of more than $5 billion in some two dozen joint ventures. as part of that attempt, by the american trade consortium, mr. giffen says he spends a lot of time lobbying. growing public fears about the soviet environment is one new factor affecting some joint-venture plans. over the past two years, soviet ministries have been talking to international firms, including occidental petroleum co. and combustion engineering inc. of the u.s., montedison s.p. a. of italy and several japanese groups, about jointly building and operating several big petrochemical plants. the plans have come under fire from soviet environmentalists, and officials say many are likely to be scaled back or dropped. whatever the difficulties, mr. gorbachev remains committed to increasing foreign trade. for political as well as economic reasons, u.s. companies are at the top of his priorities -- a point he underscored by spending two hours walking around the u.s. trade show last week. talking to a small group of u.s. executives afterwards, mr. gorbachev appeared impatient for a big expansion in u.s.-soviet trade, which now amounts to a meager $3 billion annually. the u.s. ranks fourth of countries that have concluded joint ventures, behind west germany, finland and italy. according to several people present at the meeting, mr. gorbachev also supported the idea of concluding several commercial accords with the u.s., possibly at his next summit meeting with president bush. judging by the crush at the exhibition, deprived soviet consumers are more than ready for u.s. products. hundreds of people lined up every day at the colgate-palmolive co. stand to receive a free tube of toothpaste, a commodity in chronically short supply here. and unruly crowds at rjr nabisco inc. 's booth almost knocked over a glass showcase in the rush to get a free camel cigarette sticker. some u.s. products are filtering into the soviet market under an emergency import program. both colgate and procter & gamble have received big orders for toothpaste, soap and detergents. the american trade consortium says it is planning to ship some $500 million of consumer goods, financed by bank credits, in the first few months of next year. but the current soviet purchasing spree may be a one-time affair. the goal of most u.s. firms -- joint ventures -- remains elusive. because the soviet ruble isn't convertible into dollars, marks and other western currencies, companies that hope to set up production facilities here must either export some of the goods to earn hard currency or find soviet goods they can take in a counter-trade transaction. international competition for the few soviet goods that can be sold on world markets is heating up, however. shelley m. zeiger, an entrepreneur from new jersey who buys soviet porcelain and "matryoshka" nesting dolls for export to the u.s., says west german companies already have snapped up much of the production of these items. seeking to overcome the currency problems, mr. giffen's american trade consortium, which comprises chevron corp., rjr, johnson & johnson, eastman kodak co., and archer-daniels-midland co., has concocted an elaborate scheme to share out dollar earnings, largely from the revenues of a planned chevron oil project. several medical concerns, including pfizer inc., hewlett-packard co., colgate and abbott laboratories intend to pursue a similar consortium approach. "it's hard to invest capital here on the same basis as investing in other countries," says dennis a. sokol, president of medical service partners inc., who is putting the medical consortium together. some u.s. entrepreneurs operate on a smaller scale. one group seeks to publish a u.s.-soviet medical journal in conjunction with the u.s.s.r. ministry of health. according to richard p. mills, a boston-based official of the u.s. partner, 10,000 copies of the quarterly will be printed in russian from next year. it will be financed by advertisements from u.s. companies and by simultaneous publication of an english-language journal containing details of soviet medical advancements. "we found a market niche," mr. mills boasts. "it's truly entrepreneurial."
general electric co. was given an $89.6 million navy contract for nuclear propulsion parts. westinghouse electric corp. also won a $75.5 million navy contract for nuclear propulsion parts. federal data corp. was issued a $14.5 million navy contract for computer systems. american telephone & telegraph co. was awarded an $11.5 million navy contract for oceanographic services.
cray research inc. said it sold one of its newest and largest computer systems, the cray y-mp/832, to the united kingdom meteorological office. the system is the first to be sold through the joint marketing agreement between cray and control data corp. the supercomputer, which lists for $18.5 million, will be installed in the first quarter of 1990 in the meteorological office's headquarters in bracknell, england.
shareholders of nuovo banco ambrosiano s.p. a. voted to accept a bid of 5,500 lire ($4.03) a share by france's credit agricole for 13.32% of the bank, rejecting an earlier, equal offer by italy's assicurazioni generali s.p. a. the move will give nuovo banco a badly needed foreign presence, and make credit agricole the bank's largest shareholder. it also opens a rift in the bank's shareholders' syndicate that could lead to a battle for control of the concern. nuovo banco will become italy's biggest private-sector bank when it completes its scheduled merger with banca cattolica del venetoen by year end. credit agricole asked a milan court to sequester the nuovo banco shares, the italian news agency ansa reported. the tribunal is scheduled to rule on the request friday. no reason for the request was given. credit agricole officials couldn't be immediately reached for comment. the decision to accept credit agricole's bid, valued at 283.3 billion lire ($207.4 million), came after a stormy weekend meeting. nuovo banco's second largest shareholder, the fiat s.p. a.-controlled investment concern, gemina s.p. a., fought to have generali's offer approved. gemina, which owns 13.26% of nuovo banco, abstained in the final vote on credit agricole, which was nonetheless approved by a majority of shareholders. the linkup with credit agricole will give nuovo banco its first foreign presence since it was formed from the wreck of the old banco ambrosiano, which collapsed amid scandal after the death of chairman roberto calvi in 1982. since then, the bank has strengthened its italian network, and has posted strong results. "the shareholders felt we needed a foreign presence more than we needed links with an insurance company," an ambrosiano spokeswoman said. gemina said in a statement that "it reserves the right to take any action to protect its rights as a member of the syndicate." a company spokeswoman said the company hadn't decided what measures to take, but didn't rule out legal action. generali, italy's biggest insurer, last month offered 5,500 lire a share for the nuovo banco stake held by banco popolare di milano, the bank's largest shareholder, which announced plans to sell the holdings earlier this year. a generali spokesman declined to comment on nuovo banco's rejection of the insurer's offer. on the milan stock exchange, nuovo banco's shares jumped to 4,830 lire each from 4,695 lire friday.
qintex australia ltd., a media and resorts concern controlled by australian entrepreneur christopher skase, announced a plan to restructure and sell assets to try to ease its financial problems. mr. skase, a 41-year-old former newspaper reporter who chairs the company, said in a statement that qintex will sell its 51% stake in its upscale mirage resorts in australia and hawaii as well as three australian television stations. the sales are expected to raise more than 600 million australian dollars (us$462.2 million), mr. skase said. qintex australia hasn't disclosed its borrowings, but analysts estimate the company's debt at a$1.2 billion. mr. skase also said the restructuring plan calls for the merger of qintex australia with qintex ltd., which owns 55% of qintex australia. he said the move will "significantly reduce administrative and operating costs," but he didn't provide details of the merger. company officials said over the weekend that qintex australia's bank creditors have become concerned about a barrage of bad news at the company, including a failed us$1.5 billion plan to buy mgm/ua communications co., a beverly hills, calif., movie and television production concern. friday, qintex entertainment inc., a 43%-owned u.s. affiliate, filed for protection from creditor lawsuits under chapter 11 of the u.s. bankruptcy code. analysts predicted that the move would further shake creditor confidence in qintex australia and force it to sell assets. the company's latest moves were disclosed after the australian stock exchange suspended trading in shares of qintex australia and qintex ltd. because the companies hadn't answered an exchange inquiry about the extent of their loans, investments and deposits at qintex entertainment. mr. skase's statement was addressed to the stock exchange and appeared to be a response to the inquiry. it said qintex entertainment owes qintex australia us$38.1 million in loans not secured by specific assets. qintex australia also said it has an investment of a$83.3 million in qintex entertainment shares. in the statement, mr. skase said that on the basis of current interest rates in australia, the company's asset sales would reduce interest expense by about a$120 million a year in addition to eliminating certain liabilities. in march, qintex sold 49% of the three mirage resorts to japan's nippon shinpan co. and mitsui & co. for a$433 million. yesterday's statement didn't say whether the japanese companies will acquire qintex's remaining stake in the resorts. before its shares were suspended from trading, qintex australia plunged to 16 australian cents (12 u.s. cents) a share yesterday from 33 australian cents friday. the shares traded at about a$1.50 in march, when the plan to acquire mgm/ua was announced. qintex ltd. shares sank to a$1.50 yesterday from a$3.05 friday. mr. skase's statement cited four recent problems that he said had cut group cash flow by more than a$200 million. they were what he called an "unlawful termination" by mgm/ua of the acquisition agreement with qintex, high australian interest rates, a pilots' strike at australian domestic airlines that cut revenue at the company's australian resorts and delays in completing a sale of two regional tv stations in queensland state. mgm/ua has sued qintex australia for breach of contract and fraud over the collapsed acquisition agreement, and qintex australia has threatened a countersuit. qintex australia hasn't yet reported results for the fiscal year ended july 31. in his statement, mr. skase said preliminary accounts showed that group profit before interest, tax and depreciation "will exceed a$170 million." he gave no further details. shareholders' funds as of july 31 were estimated at more than a$1 billion, mr. skase said, compared with a$725 million a year earlier. the company will make "adequate provisions" to cover costs of the dispute with mgm/ua and any loss from the investment in qintex entertainment, he said. mr. skase also disclosed a disagreement among directors of qintex australia over certain fees claimed by qintex group management services pty., a management-services concern in which qintex australia executives have an interest. qintex australia paid the management company a$32.6 million in the latest fiscal year. mr. skase said most of the money went to other parties for expenses such as rent and travel, but a smaller portion is owed to senior executives and others for management services. non-executive directors of qintex australia, who must approve payments to the senior executives, balked at the amount. two of the directors resigned, mr. skase said, so the payments haven't yet been approved.
chip's memory is here today, here tomorrow two companies plan to market a new chip with ceramic circuits that store data even when the power is off. today's most widely used data-storing chips have "volatile" memories -- their data disappear if they aren't fed a steady diet of electricity, so they need external power supplies. national semiconductor corp. and a start-up named ramtron corp. plan to start shipping so-called ferroelectric memories, which can remember data for at least 10 years without any current flowing to them. the chips use materials, such as lead zirconate titanate, to form microscopic switches that retain their data without electricity. developers caution that broad applications are several years away because the technology isn't fully refined. but ramtron of colorado springs, colo., plans to start shipping commercial quantities of simple ferroelectric chips in december. the company expects the chips eventually to be used in devices that mimic a whole range of computer memory equipment, including floppy-disk and hard-disk drives. national semiconductor is getting ferroelectric technology from krysalis corp. in albuquerque, n.m. national says it agreed to acquire krysalis's assets and will start shipping commercial quantities of its first chips, including a 4-kilobit memory, next year. once production hurdles are overcome, the chips could take over a significant part of the market. in addition to not needing an outside power source, they are potentially cheaper to make because they require fewer manufacturing steps than conventional chips. military buyers have shown interest, national says, because ferroelectric chips resist atomic radiation. and while today's non-volatile chips -- such as electronically erasable programmable read-only memory chips -- can't be used in a computer's central memory because they "learn" data slowly, ferroelectric chips accept data at very high speeds. showing up in court without being there an austin, texas, company plans to make it easy for you show up in court a thousand miles away without leaving town. witnesses often must travel long distances to give face-to-face depositions before lawyers and court reporters. that means huge travel bills. and telephone or videotape depositions just don't match physical encounters. that could change, thanks to lower long-distance rates and cheaper electronics. video telecom corp., which markets videoconferencing systems, is working with court reporters to wire a nationwide network to allow depositions by live television. the company installed a prototype system that connects dallas with miami over digital phone lines. and it is preparing to set up shop in chicago, new york and 10 other cities where court-reporting agencies can tie conference rooms into the network. while lawyers arranged individual tie-ups before, the formal network of court reporters should make things easier and cheaper. an attorney will be able to use the network for an hourly fee of between $200 and $400, depending on the quality of the picture, to take depositions from witnesses in any of the connected cities. japanese reverse tack on patent protection japan's misuse of u.s. patents has been a sore point for american chip makers. now at least one japanese company is turning the courtroom tables. until now, most japanese charges have been responses to suits against them. but last year hitachi ltd. surprised japan's electronics industry when it accused korea's samsung electronics co. of using hitachi technology to make dynamic random-access memory chips. (a settlement was reached but wasn't made public.) and hitachi went on the offensive against the u.s.'s motorola inc. earlier this month with a suit charging that motorola's new mc88200 chip infringes on a hitachi patent. another recent hitachi suit accuses motorola of reverse engineering a hitachi technology -- a turnabout from a nation of champion reverse engineers. the moves illustrate the more aggressive attitude toward patent protection that patent experts say japan is starting to take. hitachi made the reverse-engineering charges in an amendment to a counterclaim filed in a federal district court in texas after motorola sued hitachi for patent violation. hitachi charges motorola "has engaged in fraudulent and inequitable conduct in the procurement of certain motorola patents" used in motorola's mc68030 microprocessor chip. translation: motorola appears to have taken a hitachi technology that is patented in the u.s., hitachi says, and "tried to make it look like a new technology." motorola either denied or wouldn't comment on the various charges. odds and ends computer chips that simulate human vision have been developed by japan's sharp corp. they mimic the brain by "looking" at an image, extracting the fundamentals -- boundaries, corners and lines -- and translating them into computer data. sharp says the set of chips could improve fax machines, graphics computers or identification systems that recognize facial features. . . . an n.v. philips unit has created a computer system that processes video images 3,000 times faster than conventional systems. using reduced instruction-set computing, or risc, chips made by intergraph of huntsville, ala., the system splits the image it "sees" into 20 digital representations, each processed by one chip.
tandy corp., citing sluggish sales of consumer-electronics goods, said net income dropped 3.3% for the first quarter ended sept. 30. the results, which represented the fifth consecutive quarter of flat-to-lower earnings for the big electronics retailer, disappointed analysts and traders. tandy's stock fell $1.375 a share to close at $44 in new york stock exchange composite trading. net for the quarter was $62.8 million, or 73 cents a share, down from $64.9 million, or 72 cents a share, a year earlier. the company said earnings would have increased if it hadn't been actively repurchasing its shares, thus increasing its interest expense and reducing its interest income. tandy had 86.3 million shares outstanding at sept. 30, down from 90 million a year earlier. revenue rose 5% to $986 million from $937 million. tandy said consumer electronics sales at its radio shack stores have been slow, partly because of a lack of hot, new products. "radio shack continues to be lackluster," said dennis telzrow, analyst with eppler, guerin & turner in dallas. he said tandy "has done a decent job" increasing sales by manufacturing computers for others and expanding sales of its grid systems corp. subsidiary, which sells computers to bigger businesses, but "it's not enough to offset the problems at radio shack." sales at radio shack stores open more than a year grew only 2% in the quarter from a year earlier, he said. as a result, mr. telzrow said he cut his fiscal 1990 per-share earnings estimate for tandy to $4.05 from $4.20. tandy earned $88.8 million, or $3.64 a share, in the year ended june 30. barry bryant, an analyst with drexel burnham lambert inc., said tandy also has suffered from lethargic sales of its computers aimed at the home and small-office market, which are less-advanced and cheaper than computers aimed at the corporate market. tandy has added several new products to that line, including a laptop computer priced around $1,000, and is focusing its advertising on the easy-to-use software that is packaged with its machines. mr. bryant and other analysts hope all those moves will combine to help tandy's results improve in the important christmas quarter. "they've been promising 13% to 15% growth based on the strategic moves they've made," he said. "if the earnings acceleration is to take place, that should be the quarter."
at a private dinner thursday, drexel burnham lambert inc. chief executive frederick joseph delivered a sobering message about the junk bond market to officials of prudential insurance co. of america. mr. joseph conceded the junk market was in disarray, according to people familiar with the discussion. he said drexel -- the leading underwriter of high-risk junk bonds -- could no longer afford to sell any junk offerings if they might later become troubled because drexel risked losing its highly lucrative junk franchise. the dinner was a stark confirmation that 1989 is the worst year ever for the $200 billion junk market. and investors and traders alike say the current turmoil could take years to resolve. amid the market disorder, even drexel, which has the widest and most loyal following of junk bond investors, is pulling in its horns. although the big investment bank still dominates the junk market, drexel has been unable to stem the fallout from growing junk bond defaults, withdrawn new offerings, redemptions by shareholders in junk bond mutual funds and an exodus of once-devoted investors. for many money managers, the past four months have been humiliating. "this is the worst shakeout ever in the junk market, and it could take years before it's over," says mark bachmann, a senior vice president at standard & poor's corp., a credit rating company. in the third quarter, for example, junk bonds -- those with less than an investment-grade rating -- showed negative returns, the only major sector of the bond market to do so. since the end of last year, junk bonds have been outperformed by all categories of investment-grade bonds, including ultra-safe treasury securities. the junk market, which mushroomed to $200 billion from less than $2 billion at the start of the decade, has been declining for months as issuers have stumbled under the weight of hefty interest payments. the fragile market received its biggest jolt last month from campeau corp., which created its u.s. retailing empire with more than $3 billion in junk financing. campeau developed a cash squeeze that caused it to be tardy on some interest payments and to put its prestigious bloomingdale's department store chain up for sale. at that point, the junk market went into a tailspin as buyers disappeared and investors tried to sell. in an interview, mr. joseph says his dinner discussion with the prudential executives acknowledged problems for junk. "what i thought i was saying is that the market is troubled but still viable and, appropriately enough, quite quality-conscious, which is not at all bad," he says. "nobody's been perfect in their credit judgments the past couple years, and we're going to make sure our default rates are going to be in the acceptable parameters of the market." what has jolted many junk buyers is the sudden realization that junk bonds cannot necessarily be bought and sold with the ease of common stocks and many investment-grade bonds. unlike the new york stock exchange, where buyers and sellers are quickly matched, the junk market, where risky corporate loans are traded, is sometimes closed for repairs. at closely held deltec securities corp., junk bond money managers amy k. minella and hannah h. strasser say the problems of the junk market go deeper than a temporary malaise. in recent months, they say, there has been heavy selling of junk bonds by some of the market's traditional investors, while new buyers haven't materialized to replace them. wall street securities firms, "the primary source of liquidity for the high yield market," have been net sellers of junk bonds because of trading losses, deltec said in a recent, grim report to customers. mutual funds have also been net sellers of junk bonds as junk's relatively poor performance and negative press coverage have produced "above-normal" redemptions by shareholders, deltec said. investors, trying to raise cash, have sold "large liquid issues" such as rjr holdings corp. and kroger co.; declines in these benchmark issues have contributed to the market's distress. and, deltec said, buying has been severely reduced because savings and loans have been restricted in their junk purchases by recently passed congressional legislation. "in fact, savings and loans were sellers of high yield holdings throughout the quarter," deltec said. ms. minella and ms. strasser say they are managing their junk portfolios defensively, building cash and selectively upgrading the overall quality. meanwhile, prudential, the nation's largest insurer and the biggest investor in junk bonds, has seen the value of its junk bond portfolio drop to $6.5 billion from $7 billion since august because of falling junk prices. "we certainly do have a lack of liquidity here, and it's something to be concerned about," says james a. gregoire, a managing director. "i have no reason to think things will get worse, but this market has a knack for surprising us. this market teaches us to be humble." the junk market's "yield hogs are learning a real painful lesson," he says. although the majority of junk bonds outstanding show no signs of default, the market has downgraded many junk issues as if they were in trouble, says stuart reese, manager of aetna life & casualty insurance co. 's $17 billion investment-grade public bond portfolio. "but we think the risks are there for things getting a lot worse. and the risks aren't appropriate for us," he says. the big insurer, unlike prudential, owns only about $150 million of publicly sold junk bonds. the string of big junk bond defaults, which have been a major cause of the market's problems this year, probably will persist, some analysts say. "if anything, we're going to see defaults increase because credit ratings have declined," says paul asquith, associate professor at the massachusetts institute of technology's sloan school of management. mr. asquith, whose study on junk bond defaults caused a furor on wall street when it was disclosed last april, says this year's junk bond defaults already show a high correlation with his own findings. his study showed that junk bonds over time had a cumulative default rate of 34%. one indication of a growing number of junk defaults, mr. asquith says, is that about half of the $3 billion of corporate bonds outstanding that have been lowered to a default rating by s&p this year are junk bonds sold during the market's big issue years of 1984 through 1986. these bonds, now rated single-d, include junk offerings by ap industries, columbia savings (colorado), first texas savings association, gilbraltar financial corp., integrated resources inc., metropolitan broadcasting corp., resorts international inc., southmark corp. and vyquest inc. "obviously, we got a lot more smoke than fire from the people who told us the market wasn't so risky," says bradford cornell, professor of finance at university of california's anderson graduate school of management in los angeles. mr. cornell has just completed a study that finds that the risks and returns of junk bonds are less than on common stocks but more than on investment-grade bonds. mr. cornell says: "the junk market is no bonanza as drexel claimed, but it also isn't a disaster as the doomsayers say." despite the junk market's problems, drexel continues to enjoy a loyalty among junk bond investors that its wall street rivals haven't found. during the past three weeks, for example, drexel has sold $1.3 billion of new junk bonds for turner broadcasting co., uniroyal chemical, continental air and duff & phelps. still, the list of troubled drexel bond offerings dwarfs that of any firm on wall street, as does its successful offerings. troubled drexel-underwritten issues include resorts international, braniff, integrated resources, sci tv, gillette holdings, western electric and southmark. "quality junk bonds will continue to trade well," says michael holland, chairman of salomon brothers asset management inc. "but the deals that never should have been brought have now become nuclear waste."
part of a series smyrna, ga. -- the auto-dealer strip in this booming suburb runs nearly five miles along cobb parkway, stretching from the perimeter highway that circles atlanta to the "big chicken," a pullet-roofed fast-food restaurant and local landmark. twenty years ago, in the infancy of suburban sprawl, just a handful of dealerships were here. now there are 23. alongside such long-familiar names as chevrolet, ford and dodge are nameplates that didn't exist until three years ago: acura, sterling, hyundai. under construction is the strip's 24th showroom, the future home of lexus, a luxury marque launched by toyota motor corp. just two months ago. the 1980s have spawned an explosion of consumer choice in america, in everything from phone companies to colas. and especially, as the cobb parkway strip attests, in cars. americans now can choose among 572 different models of cars, vans and trucks, up from just 408 when the decade began, according to automotive news, a trade publication. for car marketers, it has become a much tougher battle to keep loyal customers from defecting to one of the new makes on the block. for american car buyers, the proliferation of choice is both liberating and confusing. malcolm macdougall, vice chairman of the jordan, mcgrath, case & taylor advertising agency in new york, calls the proliferation "nameplate mania." he says the number of automobile choices is causing stress among consumers today, and that people will simply ignore new models that lack a well-defined image. "the winners," he predicts, "will be brands from car makers that have traditionally been associated with quality and value." he says it's important for a new make to be as distinctive as possible while still retaining links to the parent company's quality image. he applauds toyota and nissan motor co. for creating separate divisions for their new luxury models, rather than simply adding more nameplates to their standard car lines. some auto executives believe the benefits of more choice outweigh the drawbacks. "there's more noise out there, and the consumer may have to work harder to cut through it," says vincent p. barabba, executive director of market research and planning at general motors corp. "but the reward is that there's less need to make tradeoffs" in choosing one's wheels. jeanene page, of north salt lake city, utah, likes the broader selection. she wants something big, and already has looked at the chrysler new yorker and lincoln town car. now, the 55-year-old car shopper is zeroing in on a full-sized van, figuring that it's just the thing to haul nine grandchildren and pull a boat at the same time. "that seems to be what all my friends are using to take the grandkids to the lake," she says. market segmentation in cars isn't new, but it's far more extensive than when alfred p. sloan jr. conceived the idea 50 years ago. the legendary gm chairman declared that his company would make "a car for every purse and purpose." now there are many cars for every purse and purpose. just four years ago, gm planners divided the combined car and truck market into seven segments. today, they identify 19 distinct segments for cars, and another 11 for trucks and vans. the number of makes has mushroomed because the u.s. is the world's biggest and richest market for automobiles; virtually every auto maker wants to sell here. for every brand like renault or fiat that has been squeezed out, others such as isuzu, daihatsu and mitsubishi have come in. detroit tries to counter the foreign invasion with new brands of its own. gm launched the geo marque this year to sell cars made in partnership with foreign auto makers, and next year gm's long-awaited saturn cars will make their debut. ford motor co. created the merkur nameplate in 1985 to sell its german-made touring sedans in the u.s. but slow sales forced ford to kill the brand just last week. when consumers have so many choices, brand loyalty is much harder to maintain. the wall street journal's "american way of buying" survey found that 53% of today's car buyers tend to switch brands. for the survey, peter d. hart research associates and the roper organization each asked about 2,000 u.s. consumers about their buying habits. which cars do americans favor most these days? it's hard to generalize, but age seems to be the best predictor. adults under age 30 like sports cars, luxury cars, convertibles and imports far more than their elders do. three of every 10 buyers under 30 would prefer to buy a sports car, compared with just 16% of adults 30 and over, according to the journal survey. young consumers prefer luxury cars by a 37% to 28% margin -- even though older buyers, because of their incomes, are more likely to actually purchase a luxury car. perhaps most striking, 35% of households headed by people aged 18 to 44 have at least one foreign car. that's true of only 14% of households headed by someone 60 or older. generally, imports appeal most to americans who live in the west and are well-educated, affluent and, especially, young. "for many baby boomers, buying a domestic car is a totally foreign experience," says christopher cedergren, auto-market analyst with j.d. power & co. of agoura hills, calif. such preferences persist even though many americans believe differences between imported and domestic cars are diminishing. only 58% of americans now believe that foreign cars get better gas mileage than domestic models, the journal survey found, down from 68% in 1987. some 46% give foreign cars higher quality ratings, down from 50% two years ago. on the other hand, only 42% say foreign cars are less comfortable than u.s. models, down from 55% in 1987. people in the automotive business disagree over how susceptible younger americans are to brand switching. "once buying habits are formed, they're very hard to break," declares thomas mignanelli, executive vice president for nissan's u.s. sales operations. but out on cobb parkway, ted negas sees it differently. "the competition is so intense that an owner's loyalty to a dealership or a car is virtually nonexistent," says mr. negas, vice president of ed voyles oldsmobile, one of the first dealerships to locate on the strip. thus the very fickleness of baby boomers may make it possible to win them back, just as it was possible to lose them. the battle for customer loyalty is evident along the cobb parkway strip. ed voyles olds recently established a special section in the service department for owners whose cars are less than a year old, so they get quicker service. just down the street, chris volvo invites serious shoppers to test-drive a new volvo to any other dealership along the strip, and compare the cars side-by-side. manufacturers, too, are stretching further to lure buyers. gm's cadillac division, ignoring detroit's long-held maxim that safety doesn't sell, is airing television commercials touting its cars' safety features. cadillac may be on to something. some 60% of the survey respondents said they would buy anti-lock brakes even if they carry a medium or high price tag. more than 50% felt the same way about air bags. both features appealed most to buyers under 45. in contrast, dashboard computers, power seats and turbo-charged engines had little appeal. but even a little appeal has a lot of attraction these days. gm's pontiac division is offering a turbo-charged v-6 engine on its grand prix model, even though it expects to sell only about 4,000 cars equipped with that option. the reason: items with narrow appeal can be important in a market as fragmented as today's. americans spent more than $190 billion on new cars and trucks last year, and just 1% of that market exceeded polaroid co. 's sales of $1.86 billion. "even if it's only 1%," says gm's mr. barabba, "would you throw away sales the size of polaroid?" (all buyers 47%)
american telephone & telegraph co. said it will lay off 75 to 85 technicians here, effective nov. 1. the workers install, maintain and repair its private branch exchanges, which are large intracompany telephone networks.
it's a california crime saga worthy of an erle stanley gardner title: the case of the purloined palm trees. edward carlson awoke one morning last month to find eight holes in his front yard where his prized miniature palms, called cycads, once stood. days later, the thieves returned and dug out more, this time adding insult to injury. "the second time," he says, "they left the shovel." no garden-variety crime, palm-tree rustling is sprouting up all over southern california, bringing big bucks to crooks who know their botany. cycads, the most popular of which is the sago palm, are doll-sized versions of california's famous long-necked palms, with stubby trunks and fern-like fronds. because the sago is relatively rare and grows only a couple of inches a year, it's a pricey lawn decoration: a two-foot tall sago can retail for $1,000, and taller ones often fetch $3,000 or more. "evidently, somebody has realized it's easy money to steal these things," says loran whitelock, a research associate specializing in cycads at the los angeles state and county arboretum. just last week, would-be thieves damaged three sagos at mr. whitelock's home in the eagle rock section before something frightened them off, foiled. "it's hard to think someone is raping your garden," he says. police suspect that the criminals, who dig up the plants in the dead of night, are selling them to nurseries or landscapers. the sago has become a popular accent in tony new housing tracts, apparently giving the rustlers a ready market for their filched fronds. thieves are going to find "anybody who has enough bucks to plant these things in their front yard," says william morrissey, an investigator with the police department in garden grove, calif., where five such thefts have been reported in the past several weeks. the department is advising residents to plant sagos, if they must, in the back yard and telling nurseries to be on the lookout for anyone trying to palm one off. but for those californians who want exotic gardens out front where neighbors can appreciate them, there's always harold smith's approach. after three sagos were stolen from his home in garden grove, "i put a big iron stake in the ground and tied the tree to the stake with a chain," he says proudly. "and you can't cut this chain with bolt cutters."
a group of shareholders filed suit against imperial corp. of america, drexel burnham lambert inc., first executive corp. and others, charging them with artificially inflating imperial's stock price to protect certain major investors. the complaint, filed in federal district court, accuses imperial and other defendants of issuing false and misleading financial data. it also charges that imperial, the holding company for imperial savings & loan, experienced major losses and writedowns because of improper assessment of the risks of junk-bond investments and wholesale consumer loan packages. the suit seeks unspecified damages. imperial is in the midst of reducing its junk-bond holdings and getting out of the investment banking business in order to return to traditional thrift activities. the derivative suit is similar to a class-action complaint filed earlier this year. imperial said in a statement it expects other complaints to be filed in the wake of the original suit and a recent article in barron's magazine that focused on the company's problems. although an imperial spokesman said the company hadn't yet been served with the derivative suit, he reiterated the company's statement that it would vigorously defend itself against the class-action suit. spokesmen at drexel and first executive said the companies hadn't yet been served with the suit. in a separate complaint also filed in federal court here, shareholder max grill of new york charged imperial, its top executives and directors with breach of fiduciary duty and squandering the company's assets. imperial said it hadn't been served with this suit either.
companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts' estimates. the companies are followed by at least three analysts, and had a minimum five-cent change in actual earnings per share. estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted. the percent difference compares actual profit with the 30-day estimate where at least three analysts have issues forecasts in the past 30 days. otherwise, actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate. source: zacks investment research
rhone-poulenc s.a., paris, said it completed the purchase of the specialty chemicals operation of rtz corp., a british mining and industrial group. rhone-poulenc, a chemical and pharmaceutical company, said rtz chemicals has annual sales of about $900 million. it didn't release terms of the transaction.
consumer spending in britain rose 0.1% in the third quarter from the second quarter and was up 3.8% from a year ago, the central statistical office estimated friday.
a group including gene e. phillips, former chairman of southmark corp., and william s. friedman, former vice chairman of southmark, lowered its stake in the dallas real estate concern to 7.7%, according to a filing with the securities and exchange commission. the group said it sold 455,410 southmark common shares from sept. 5 to oct. 5 for 18.75 cents to 25 cents a share. the filing said the group continues to hold 3,481,887 remaining shares.
eastman kodak co., seeking to position itself in the potentially huge high-definition television market, unveiled a converter that can transform conventional motion-picture film into high-definition video. the move also helps the rochester, n.y., photographic giant ensure that its motion-picture film business -- for which it holds a virtual monopoly, supplying every hollywood movie company -- isn't made obsolete by the upstart hdtv business. while the prototype converter is costly, it's being lauded by the infant hdtv industry as a way of increasing the number of high-quality shows that can be seen on the new medium. "the industry has been waiting with bated breath for the machines to come along," says david niles, president of eleven twenty five productions inc., a new york pioneer in high-definition programming. he notes that industry executives have until now worried that they would face a severe shortage of programs once consumers begin replacing their tv sets with hdtvs. japanese electronic giants, such as sony corp. and hitachi ltd., have focused almost entirely on hdtv hardware, and virtually ignored software or programs shot in high-definition. and only a handful of small u.s. companies are engaged in high-definition software development. it's estimated that just about 250 hours of hd programming is currently available for airing. kodak says its new ccd hdtv converter will help alleviate the problem by allowing programmers and broadcasters to convert movies and television programs shot in 35mm motion-picture film into high-definition video. consumers will be able to switch on their hdtv sets and get all the viewing benefits the high-tech medium offers. otherwise, they'd be watching programs that are no different in quality from what they currently view on color tvs. it would be like "watching a black and white movie on a color tv set," says malcolm g. saull, chairman of the film and video department at the rochester institute of technology. the new converters are "a critical link between film and the television domain," says joerg d. agin, vice president and general manager of kodak's motion picture and audiovisual products division. kodak won't disclose the cost or when its converter will be on the market, but it's estimated the machine may be available within two years. a similar machine already on the market, made by rank sintel ltd., a unit of rank organisation, costs about $500,000. and the potential market is tremendous, industry experts say. if hdtv takes off in the u.s., there will be demand for some 4,000 to 5,000 hdtv converters, known in the industry as telecines. demand will come first from programming production companies and then from television stations. "the converter is head and shoulders above anything else i've seen," says richard j. stumpf, vice president-engineering and development at mca inc. 's universal city studios. and mr. niles, the program producer, contends that kodak's move is "a sound marketing decision. they can't afford to stay out of hdtv." indeed, the stakes are high. the u.s. electronics industry estimates that the hdtv market will total about $150 billion over the next two decades, with an additional $400 billion expected to go for related products. hdtvs break down images into more than 1,100 lines, compared with 525 for today's televisions, providing considerably sharper detail. and the sets are wider, resembling the dimensions of a movie screen. but the financial rewards aren't expected soon, nor are they guaranteed. experts estimate the first sets of hdtvs won't be available for another five to 10 years, and will probably retail for more than $3,000 each in today's dollars. some critics say they won't be quickly embraced by consumers because of the high price. nevertheless, kodak couldn't risk letting hdtv turn its motion-picture film business into a dinosaur. "kodak understands hdtv is where everybody is going," says rit's mr. spaull.
when robert mcduffie was 14, he got a chance to play in the starting lineup for his high school basketball team in macon, ga. unfortunately, his mother had tickets for a recital by itzhak perlman the same night, and she was adamant about his attending. "i threw such a fit," says mr. mcduffie, who had begun violin studies at the age of six. "but once perlman started playing, i didn't give a damn about basketball. . . . afterwards, i went home and practiced for three hours." today, it's obvious that the brawny, six-foot, one-inch musician made the right choice. at 31, mr. mcduffie has a rich, full-bodied tone, an admirable rhythmic precision and an increasingly busy schedule. he's currently in the midst of a 17-city u.s. tour with yehudi menuhin and the warsaw sinfonia, with stops including charleston, s.c. (oct. 25), sarasota, fla. (oct. 28), tampa, fla. (oct. 29) and miami (oct. 31). later this season he gives a recital at washington's kennedy center, and appears as soloist with several major orchestras. yet mr. mcduffie's career has developed at a slower pace than those of some of his better known contemporaries. during the late 1970s, he was part of a musical "brat pack" -- a group of budding virtuosos who studied at the juilliard school with the noted pedagogue dorothy delay. his violin classmates included shlomo mintz, a protege of isaac stern who performed with major orchestras while still a student; cho-liang lin, who joined the roster of icm artists inc. at the age of 18; and nadja salerno-sonnenberg, who launched her career by winning the 1981 naumberg competition. "i thought i was over the hill at 22," recalls mr. mcduffie, an outgoing man with pale blue eyes and a light southern drawl. "but i wasn't ready for a career at that time." young mcduffie's first violin teacher was henrik schwarzenberger, a hungarian refugee who taught in the macon public school system. "he taught me how to play like a gypsy," jokes the musician. "i didn't learn to count until i got to juilliard." after studies at that conservatory's pre-college division with an assistant to the legendary instructor ivan galamian, he switched at the college level to miss delay, mr. galamian's longtime assistant and, ultimately, his rival. "i think i had to prove myself to her," says mr. mcduffie. "but she was always encouraging. she only put her foot down twice," he continues. "in my freshman year, my roommate was known as a party animal. she thought i wasn't getting my practicing done." as the violinist tells it, his grandmotherly looking teacher "put her hands on her hips, stomped her foot and said, `you've just got to get the {expletive deleted} out of there. '" the second incident took place after mr. mcduffie gave an ambitious student recital and was feeling rather pleased with himself. miss delay requested that he come to her studio with a tape of the recital. "we listened to the chausson `poeme, '" he recalls, "and she said, `you hear the first note, that b-flat? that's the only note that's truly in tune . . .'." "that's the most important experience i've had with any teacher," he says, "because she taught me how to listen. now, when i play with orchestras, the musicians often compliment me on my intonation." it was also at juilliard that mr. mcduffie discovered his predilection for conservative, 20th-century american composers such as david diamond and samuel barber. after winning a school competition with a performance of the latter's "violin concerto," mr. mcduffie was invited to play the work for the composer, who was dying of cancer. "barber was seated by the fireplace looking very pale," recalls the violinist, who performed the work with a piano accompanist at the composer's apartment. "he didn't say much, but what he said was important because it's not in the score. there's a beautiful, coplandesque motif -- he'd kill me if he heard me say that -- throughout the first movement . . . the only time the violin has it is right at the end. it's written `marcato' in the score, and i played it that way, kind of gigue-like. and he yelled out `dolce! dolce!' {`sweet! sweet!'}." "so we did it over," he adds. "i played very transparently, with the tip of the bow. if a conductor is sensitive enough to bring down the orchestra {volume} at that point, it makes the piece magical. i don't know why barber never told anybody else. on isaac stern's recording it's very biting." since leaving juilliard, mr. mcduffie has made some smart moves and some controversial ones. his guest appearance on the nbc soap opera "another world," scandalized musical elitists. by contrast, he's won kudos for his espousal of william schuman's "violin concerto," which he recently recorded for angel/emi along with leonard bernstein's engaging "serenade for violin solo, strings and percussion." mr. mcduffie's sweet tone, heartfelt lyricism and rhythmic punch make him an ideal interpreter of both works. aided by the fluid playing of the st. louis symphony under leonard slatkin's direction, this "serenade" really swings. mr. schuman's "violin concerto," which sounds more like a mildly atonal rhapsody for solo violin with orchestral accompaniment, meanders until the propulsive "agitato, fervente." but there are ample rewards in its plaintive slow sections and virtuoso fireworks for soloist, brass and timpani. at avery fisher hall here, mr. mcduffie was heard recently with mr. menuhin and the warsaw sinfonia in more conventional fare -- bruch's overwrought "violin concerto in g minor." his performance was so effusive and driven that the phrases rarely breathed. the 35-member sinfonia played adroitly with a big, lush sound that belied its size. whatever he plays, mr. mcduffie finds satisfaction in the music itself -- "something greater out there than me," as he puts it during an interview at the manhattan apartment he shares with wife, camille, a literary publicist. "a normal person did not write the beethoven `violin concerto, '" he declares. "even when i hear it played badly, i'm still humbled by the piece. if i could ever feel i've contributed to it in some way, then all the hard work has been worth it." ms. jepson is a free-lance music writer in new york.
are consumers too deep in hock? a lot of observers think so, and, if they're right, the whole economy as well as the spendthrifts among us could be hurt. a sudden, forced cutback by consumers, who normally account for about two-thirds of economic activity, would damp the economy at a time when plant-and-equipment spending is slowing and deficit-racked governments can't readily take up the slack. and another wave of bad loans would further batter many already-shaky lending institutions. the worriers cite some worrisome trends. during the almost seven-year-old economic expansion, inflation-adjusted gross national product, disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures have risen 30%, but inflation-adjusted consumer installment credit has surged 66%. and the ratio of installment debt to disposable personal income -- personal income after taxes -- has hit a high of about 18 1/2%. however, these figures don't seem to worry thomas a. durkin, an economist at the federal reserve board. in a paper presented at the recent annual meeting of the national association of business economists in san francisco, mr. durkin comments that "installment credit always grows rapidly in cyclical advances, and growth in this cycle is very typical of earlier experiences." he adds: "we are now witnessing a slowdown which, if history is a guide, could persist for a while." but what about the debt burden? mr. durkin doubts that "there is some magic level" at which the ratio of installment debt to disposable income "indicates economic problems." and, "more importantly," he says, "the debt burden measured other ways is not really in uncharted waters." the chart below shows why (see accompanying illustration -- wsj oct. 23, 1989). the ratio of consumer installment credit to disposable income, though up a bit, hasn't climbed steeply, and such debt as a percent of household assets is little changed. moreover, the burden of consumer credit payments relative to disposable income may be "lower in this cycle than earlier," mr. durkin says. he notes that some "revolving credit-card credit is actually convenience credit" being used simply as a handy way of paying bills rather than a handy way of borrowing. in addition, he says, "longer maturities on automobile and other forms of installment credit boost the stock of debt faster than the flow of repayments and the accompanying payment burden." and if you "consider the changing distribution of credit," mr. durkin says, "much of the increase in debt in recent years is due to increasing credit use by higher-income families," that is, "those probably best able to handle it." citing figures on home-equity loans, he notes that "11% of homeowners had home-equity credit accounts, but the proportion rises to 16% of homeowners in the $45,000-$60,000 income range and 23% of homeowners with income above $60,000." and much home-equity credit is used conservatively. "the most frequent use is home improvement, which presumably improves the value of the property," mr. durkin says. so, it isn't surprising that consumer-credit delinquencies at banks remain, as the chart shows, reassuringly below some earlier highs (see accompanying illustration -- wsj oct. 23, 1989). a severe recession could, of course, raise delinquency rates, but so far the current levels of consumer debt don't seem to loom as a major threat. in fact, the current weakness in auto buying and department-store sales and the gradual upturn in the household saving rate suggest that consumers, conservative as ever, are already clutching their purses a bit more tightly. in july, consumer installment credit outstanding fell for the first time since january 1987. "consumers appear unwilling to add to their leverage to support their spending," bruce steinberg, a merrill lynch economist, says. "as a result, household debt appears to be stabilizing at around 63% of gnp." consumers, credit cards in hand, aren't running amok through the shopping malls -- or putting the economy at any great risk.
maidenform inc. loves to be intimate with its customers, but not with the rest of the public. the 67-year-old maker of brassieres, panties, and lingerie enjoys one of the best-known brand images, but its financial profile is closely guarded by members of the founding family. "there are very few companies that can boast of such a close-knit group," says robert a. brawer, 52 years old, recently named president, succeeding beatrice coleman, his mother-in-law, who remains chairman. "we are a vanishing breed," he muses. mrs. coleman, 73, who declined to be interviewed, is the maidenform strategist. sales have tripled during her 21-year tenure to about $200 million in 1988. maidenform says it is very profitable but declines to provide specifics. the company sells image. its current ad campaign, on which maidenform has spent more than $15 million since fall 1987, doesn't even show its underwear products, but rather men like christopher reeve, star of the "superman" movies, talking about their lingerie turn-ons. the maidenform name "is part of american pop culture," says joan sinopoli, account supervisor of the campaign by levine, huntley, schmidt & beaver, a new york ad firm. maidenform generated such memorable campaigns as "i dreamed i . . . in my maidenform bra," and "the maidenform woman. you never know where she'll turn up." "capitalizing on the brand is key," says mr. brawer, whose immediate plans include further international expansion and getting better control of distribution outside the u.s. "the intimate apparel industry is perceived to be a growth industry and clearly {maidenform} is a force to be reckoned with," says david s. leibowitz, a special situations analyst at american securities corp. in new york. although working women are "forced to wear the uniform of the day, to retain their femininity they are buying better quality, more upscale intimate apparel," he said. although mr. brawer's appointment as president was long expected, the move on sept. 25 precipitated the resignation of alan lesk as senior vice president of sales and merchandising. three days later, mr. lesk was named president and chief executive officer of olga co., a competing intimate apparel division of warnaco inc. warnaco also owns warners, another major intimate apparel maker. mr. lesk couldn't be reached to comment. but maidenform officials say that after spending 24 years at maidenform, mr. lesk, 48, made it clear he wanted the top job. "if you want the presidency of the company, this isn't the firm to work for," says james mogan, 45, who was named senior vice president of sales, assuming some of the responsibilities of mr. lesk. the company downplayed the loss of mr. lesk and split his merchandising responsibilities among a committee of four people. "my style is less informal," mr. brawer says. top officers insist maidenform's greatest strength is its family ownership. "you can't go anywhere in this company and find an organizational chart," one delights. "it is fun competing as a private company," mr. brawer says. "you can think long range." other major players in intimate apparel apparently feel the same way. warnaco was taken private by spectrum group in 1986 for about $487 million. and last year, playtex holdings inc. went private for about $680 million. it was then split into playtex apparel inc., the intimate apparel division, and playtex family products corp., which makes tampons, hair-care items and other products. publicly traded vf corp., which owns vanity fair, and sara lee corp., which owns bali co., are also strong forces in intimate apparel. buy-out offers for maidenform aren't infrequent, says executive vice president david c. masket, but they aren't taken very seriously. when he gets calls, "i don't even have to consult" with mrs. coleman, mr. masket says. the company could command a good price in the market. "over the past three and a half years, apparel companies, many of whom have strong brand names, have been bought at about 60% of sales," says deborah bronston, prudential-bache securities inc. apparel analyst. mr. brawer, along with mrs. coleman and her daughter, elizabeth, an attorney who is vice chairman, are the family members involved in the operations of maidenform, which employs about 5,000. mr. brawer's wife, catherine, and robert stroup, elizabeth's husband, round out the five-member board. each has an equal vote at the monthly meetings. "we are all very amiable," mr. brawer says. executives say mrs. coleman is very involved in the day-to-day operations, especially product development. in the late 1960s she designed a lightweight stretch bra that boosted sales. her father, william rosenthal, designed the then-dress making company's first bra in the 1920s, which he said gave women a "maiden form" compared with the "boyish form" they got from the "flat bandages" used for support at the time. while mr. rosenthal introduced new undergarment designs, his wife, ida, concentrated on sales and other financial matters. the name maidenform was coined by a third business partner, enid bissett. the company has 14 plants and distribution facilities in the u.s., puerto rico, other parts of the caribbean and ireland. maidenform products are mainly sold at department stores, but the company has quietly opened a retail store of its own in omaha, neb. , and has 24 factory outlets, with plans to add more. before joining maidenform in 1972, mr. brawer, who holds a doctoral degree in english from the university of chicago, taught at the university of wisconsin. as a senior vice president, he has headed the company's designer lingerie division, oscar de la renta, since its inception in 1988. to maintain exclusivity of that designer line, it isn't labeled with the maidenform name. while the company has always been family-run, mr. brawer isn't the first person to marry into the family and subsequently head maidenform. mrs. coleman's husband, joseph, a physician, succeeded mrs. rosenthal as president and served in that post until his death in 1968.
china could exhaust its foreign-exchange reserves as early as next year, a western government report says, unless imports are cut drastically to help narrow the balance-of-payments deficit. according to the report, completed last month, if china's trade gap continues to widen at the pace seen in the first seven months of this year, the reserves would be wiped out either in 1990 or 1991. a country is considered financially healthy if its reserves cover three months of its imports. the $14 billion of reserves china had in june would cover just that much. the report by the western government, which declines to be identified, concludes that "a near-term foreign-exchange payment problem can be avoided only if import growth drops to below 5% per annum." according to chinese customs figures, import growth has slowed in recent months, dropping to 16% in july and 7.1% in august from the year-earlier periods, compared with an average growth rate of 26% in the first half. but before import growth slowed, china's buying spree in the first half already had taken its toll on foreign-exchange reserves. the $14 billion level in june marked a drop from $19 billion at the end of april. china's last big import binge sent reserves tumbling to $10.6 billion in june 1985 from $16.6 billion the previous september. china might stave off a crisis if it acts as forcefully as it did to arrest the 1985 decline, when beijing slammed the brakes on foreign-exchange spending and devalued the currency. but this time, china faces a more difficult battle because of economic forces that have come into play since the tiananmen square killings june 4. for example, china's hard-currency income is expected to suffer from the big drop in tourist arrivals since june 4. revenue from tourism this year is projected to total $1.3 billion, down from $2.2 billion last year. because of this and the huge trade gap, the deficit in china's current account, which measures trade in goods and services plus certain unilateral transfers of funds, is expected to widen sharply from the $3.8 billion deficit last year. the western government report suggests a number of scenarios for china's current-account balance, two of which are considered most likely. in one, imports and exports continue to grow at the respective average rates of 25% and 5% recorded during the first seven months, and the current-account deficit widens to $13.1 billion. in 1985, china had a record deficit of $11.4 billion. the other scenario assumes that beijing takes effective actions to curb imports in the coming months. in this case, china would still finish the year with a current-account deficit of $8.7 billion, based on projections that imports for all of this year grow 20% and exports 10%. if china were still on good terms with foreign lenders, it might be able to stem the drain on its foreign-exchange reserves by using some loan funds to offset the current-account deficit. but since june, foreign bankers led by international financial institutions have virtually suspended their new loans to china. even if borrowing resumes, commercial bankers aren't expected to lend as much as before. in addition, economists are forecasting a slowdown in foreign direct investments as businessmen become increasingly wary of china's deteriorating political and economic environment. on top of all this, foreign-debt repayments are expected to peak in 1991 to 1992. with less capital coming in, china's balance of payments would suffer. the western government report's first scenario assumes a 30% reduction in foreign borrowing and a 5% contraction in foreign direct investment. in the second, foreign borrowing is projected to grow 10% and investment to drop 10%. but in either case, the report says, china's balance of payments would rapidly dry up foreign reserves, which are used to finance the imbalance. in the first scenario, the reserves would be exhausted next year, and in the second they would be wiped out in 1991.
roche holding ag, parent of the swiss chemical and pharmaceutical group, said its group sales rose 22% in the first nine months of the year to 7.32 billion francs ($4.51 billion). the company reported good gains in all of its divisions. roche also said it expects a "considerable rise" in 1989 group profit from the 641.5 million-franc ($396 million) net in 1988.
new canaan investments inc. said it closed the acquisition of carr-lowrey glass co. from newell co., a freeport, ill., maker of do-it-yourself home products. terms weren't disclosed. carr-lowrey, a maker of glass bottles for the cosmetics and toiletries industries, had sales last year of about $40 million. new canaan investments is a closely held investment partnership with interests primarily in the packaging industry.
ralph brown was 31,000 feet over minnesota when both jets on his falcon 20 flamed out. at 18,000 feet, he says, he and his co-pilot "were looking for an interstate or a cornfield" to land. at 13,000 feet, the engines restarted. but knowing that mechanics would probably ground him for repairs, mr. brown skipped his stop in nearby chicago and set course to get his load -- a few hundred parcels -- to the memphis package-sorting hub on time. had he been a little less gung-ho, "i'd have gotten the thing on the ground and headed for the nearest bar," mr. brown says. but he flies for federal express corp., perhaps the closest thing in corporate america to the green berets. federal's employees work long hours and seem to thrive on the stress of racing the clock. like mr. brown, they sometimes go to surprising lengths to meet that overarching corporate goal: delivering the goods on time. they are a tribute to federal's management which, since the company's founding 16 years ago, has had its way with its work force -- an unusual feat in the contentious transportation industry. that may soon change. this month, federal's 2,048 pilots, including some 961 acquired along with tiger international inc. in february, will decide whether to elect the powerful air line pilots association as their bargaining agent. the election, which would bring the first major union to federal's u.s. operations, has pitted new hires against devoted veterans such as mr. brown. it has also rattled federal's strongly anti-union management, which is already contending with melding far-flung operations and with falling profits. "a union, sooner or later, has to have an adversary, and it has to have a victory," frederick w. smith, federal's chairman and chief executive, says with disdain. "in our formula, we don't have any losers except the competition." what managers really fear is that the pro-union movement could spread beyond the pilots. under federal transportation law, a government mediator is attempting to reconcile the melding of tiger's job classifications into federal's. depending on the outcome, the merged company may face union elections this fall among airplane mechanics, ramp workers, stock clerks and flight dispatchers. these groups constitute up to 10% of its work force. "unions would have a profound effect on the whole culture of the company," says bernard la londe, a professor at ohio state university at columbus and a federal consultant. that culture, carefully crafted by mr. smith, leaves little, if any, room for unions. since founding the company, the charismatic vietnam vet, who is still only 46 years old, has fostered an ethos of combat. flights are "missions." mr. smith's managers have, at times, been called "ho chi minh's guerrillas." the bravo zulu award, the navy accolade for a "job well done," is bestowed on federal's workers who surpass the call of duty. competitors are known as the "enemy." to reinforce employees' dedication, mr. smith pays well. he also lets workers vent steam through an elaborate grievance procedure and, as a perk, fly free in empty cockpit seats. he gives pep talks in periodic "family briefings" beamed internationally on "fxtv," the company's own television network. and, with many of his 70,000 workers, mr. smith's damn-the-torpedoes attitude has caught on. james cleveland, a courier who earned a bravo zulu for figuring out how to get a major customer's 1,100-parcel-a-week load to its doorstep by 8 a.m., considers himself far more than a courier. "we don't just hand the customer the package. that's just the beginning," he says. "in essence, we run the show." david sanders, a longtime pilot, bristles at the mere suggestion that a union might tamper with his flight schedule. "this is america," he says. "nobody has the right to tell me how much i can work." such attitudes have given federal flexibility, not only to rapidly implement new technology but to keep its work force extraordinarily lean. the company deliberately understaffs, stretching employees' schedules to the limit. but though couriers work as many as 60 hours a week during the autumn rush, they leave early during slack times while still being assured of a minimum paycheck. pilots, as well, routinely fly overtime to ensure that none are furloughed during seasonal lows. the operational freedom has also given federal a leg up on archrival united parcel service inc., the nation's largest employer of united brotherhood of teamsters members. ups won't discuss its labor practices, but, according to mr. cleveland, a former ups employee, and others, union work rules prohibit ups drivers from doing more than carrying packages between customers and their vans. because ups drivers aren't permitted to load their own vehicles at the depot, say these couriers, packages often get buried in the load and are delivered late. labor problems are the last thing mr. smith needs right now. although the tiger acquisition has brought federal a long way toward becoming the global player it wants to be, it also has brought problems. it more than doubled federal's long-term debt to $1.9 billion, thrust the company into unknown territory -- heavy cargo -- and suddenly expanded its landing rights to 21 countries from four. federal, on its own, hadn't been doing very well overseas. it had hemorrhaged in its attempt to get into asia, where treaty restrictions forced it to fly some planes half-empty on certain routes. on routes to south america, the company had no backup jets to ensure delivery when planes were grounded. in europe, business suffered as federal bought several local companies, only to have the managers quit. these and other problems squeezed federal's profit margins last year to 8%, down from more than 13% annually in the first half of the decade. earnings have plummeted, too, in each of the past three quarters. in the fiscal first period ended aug. 31, profit fell 54% to $30.4 million, or 58 cents a share, mostly because of the tiger merger, federal says. federal's stock price, however, has held up well, driven in part by the general run-up of airline stocks, analysts say. since trading as low as $42.25 a share in may, federal's shares have rallied as high as $57.87 in new york stock exchange composite trading. they closed friday at $53.25, down 50 cents on the day. there's a certain irony in the fact that federal express faces its first union problems as a result of its tiger purchase. tiger itself was founded by a band of gungho airmen who had airlifted supplies "over the hump" from india to china during world war ii. in the early 1970s, mr. smith modeled his fledgling company on tiger's innovation of hub-and-spoke and containerized-cargo operations. but from early on, tiger's workers unionized, while federal's never have. federal express officials acknowledge mistakes in their drive overseas but say it will pay off eventually. analysts expect federal's earnings to improve again in its fiscal third quarter ending feb. 28, when the company should begin benefiting from tiger's extra flights, back-up planes and landing rights. until then, they expect the cost of integrating the two carriers to continue crimping profits. for now, the union issue is the most nettlesome of federal's tiger problems, management believes. although encouraging dialogue between managers and workers, mr. smith doesn't countenance what he considers insubordination. when a large group of pilots once signed petitions opposing work-rule and compensation changes, he called a meeting in a company hangar and dressed them down for challenging his authority. he then made most of the changes, pilots say. that sort of approach, however, hasn't worked since the addition of tiger. its 6,500 workers, who had battled tiger's management for years over givebacks, were union members until the day of the merger, when most of their unions were automatically decertified. soon after the merger, moreover, federal's management asked tiger's pilots to sign an agreement stating that they could be fired any time, without cause or notice. when the pilots refused, the company retracted it. mr. smith angered federal's pilots, too. in his haste to seal the deal with tiger chairman saul steinberg last august, mr. smith ignored a promise that he had made to his own pilots three years ago: that any fliers acquired in future mergers would be "end-tailed" -- put at the bottom of the pilot seniority list that determines work schedules, pay and career options. the tiger merger agreement stipulated that the lists be combined on the basis of tenure. mr. smith is trying hard to allay the anger. and even some pro-union pilots say his charisma and popularity among the many former military fliers could be tough to beat. "a lot of people are identifying a vote for representation as a vote against fred smith," says j.x. gollich, a tiger-turned-federal pilot and union activist. mr. smith and other top federal executives have met with tiger workers in los angeles, ohio, new york, alaska, asia and europe. recently, they have appeared every few weeks in talk-show type videos, countering pro-union arguments. in one video, mr. smith defended his agreement to merge the pilot-seniority lists. he said mr. steinberg had insisted that the merger talks move quickly. regulators, as well, might have quashed the deal if tiger's pilots hadn't been protected, he said. furthermore, mr. smith added, "our contract with our pilots says that we will manage our fleet operations with their advice. it doesn't give any particular group the ability to veto change." already, the fight has been costly. the seniority-list controversy, along with the job-classification dispute, has been turned over to the mediator. meanwhile, the company is operating with two separate pilot groups and seniority lists, and that is costing federal "a big number," says james barksdale, executive vice president and chief operating officer. the issue has also cost federal management a lot of good will among its old pilots. "they were willing to mistreat us because we hadn't shown any moxie, any resistance," says william queenan, a dc-10 pilot and 14-year federal veteran. adds john poag, a 727 captain and past chairman of the company-sponsored flight advisory board: "they've made all these magnanimous gestures to the flying tiger pilots, and for us, nothing." such animosity could prove pivotal in the union vote. a large majority of the 961 former tiger fliers support the union, according to a union study. but though most of the 1,087 federal pilots are believed opposed, it is unclear just how much their loyalty to mr. smith has been eroded. the fight has turned ugly and, among pilots at least, has shattered the esprit de corps that mr. smith worked so hard to build. anti-union pilots have held ballot-burning parties. some younger pilots say they have had to endure anti-union harangues by senior pilots while flying across the country. and for now, at least, the competition isn't the only enemy. barney barnhardt, a 727 captain and leader of the pro-union forces, said he has received two anonymous death threats and been challenged to a fight with tire irons by a colleague. "the pilots are either for us or extremely against us," he says with a sigh.
harsco corp. said it obtained a $33.1 million export order for armored recovery vehicles and related support equipment. harsco declined to say what country placed the order. the company said it received an order for 23 of the vehicles, which retrieve tanks and other heavy-tracked vehicles when they break down or are damaged, and an option for 16 more. delivery is to begin in early 1991. harsco produces products for defense, industrial, commercial and construction markets.
the senate convicted u.s. district judge alcee hastings of florida of eight impeachment articles, removing the 53-year-old judge from his $89,500-a-year, lifetime job. mr. hastings's case was particularly nettlesome because it marked the first time a federal official was impeached and removed from office on charges of which a jury had acquitted him. in 1983, mr. hastings was found not guilty of accepting a $150,000 bribe in a case before him, the central charge on which the senate convicted him. he was only the sixth federal judge ever ousted from office after an impeachment trial. with no floor debate, the senate on friday voted 69-26 to convict mr. hastings of perjury and conspiring to accept a bribe, five votes more than needed. conviction on any single impeachment article was enough to remove judge hastings from office. he was found not guilty of three charges, involving accusations that he had improperly disclosed information about a sensitive, government investigation. the senate didn't vote on six lesser charges. although mr. hastings had been acquitted by a jury, lawmakers handling the prosecution in congress had argued that the purpose of impeachment isn't to punish an individual. instead, they argued that impeachment aims to protect public institutions from people who have abused their positions of trust, irrespective of the outcome of prior criminal or civil cases. mr. hastings faced the senators and sat impassively during the first two roll-call votes, then quickly left the chamber. in an impromptu news conference on the capitol steps, he denounced the senators' action. "their opinion is devoid of the wisdom of the forefathers' teaching regarding impeachment," mr. hastings said. for the future, he said he would run for governor of florida. mr. hastings was appointed to the federal bench by president carter in 1979 and was one of the few black federal judges in the country. while he packed the senate gallery with his supporters during some of the impeachment trial, most civil rights groups kept their distance from his case. following the impeachment conviction, dr. benjamin hooks, executive director of the national association for the advancement of colored people, issued a restrained statement, warning that the hastings case could set a "dangerous precedent," but adding, "we must respect the considered judgment of the senate."
when last we left him, fbi agent nick mancuso had solved a murder mystery, unraveled a washington political scandal, and racked up some pretty good ratings numbers in the miniseries "favorite son." what next for the crusty fbi agent with the heart of gold? a spinoff series, of course. there are plenty of worse inspirations for shows -- and most of them had already made the fall lineup: a nun raising some lovable orphans. a den mother raising some lovable teen models. a bunch of tans and bathing suits posing as lovable lifeguards. in that context, robert loggia's riveting performance as the unlovable -- even crotchety -- veteran agent seems a better franchise for a series than most. week by week on "mancuso fbi" (nbc, fridays, 10 p.m. et), he pokes around the crime styles of the rich, famous and powerful of the washington scene -- a loose cannon on deck at the fbi. over the first few weeks, "mancuso fbi" has sprung straight from the headlines, which is either a commendable stab at topicality, or a lack of imagination, or both. the opening show featured a secretary of defense designate accused of womanizing (a la john tower). when his secretary is found floating dead in the pol's pool, mancuso is called in to investigate. last week, a young black girl claimed she had been raped by a white police officer (a la tawana brawley). in this week's show, there's an unsafe nuclear weaponsmaking facility (a la rocky flats). along the way, we're introduced to the supporting cast: a blond bombshell secretary (randi brazen -- her real name, honest), a scheming young boss (fredric lehne), another blonde bombshell who's also an idealistic lawyer (lindsay frost), and a forensics expert (charles siebert). if all of this seems a little stale, it's redeemed in part by some tricky plot twists: the usual suspects are found to be guilty, then not guilty, then guilty -- but of a different crime. (in last week's rape case, for example, the girl turns out to have been a victim of incest, and the biggest villains are the politicians who exploit the case.) most of all though, the show is redeemed by the character of mancuso. what makes the veteran fbi man so endearing is his hard-bitten cynicism -- earned, we discover, when he was assigned to the civil rights movement back in the 1960s. he wasn't protecting the freedom marchers; he was tailing them as subversives. this is not the "mississippi burning" scenario that thrills his young colleagues: "kid, you've been reading classic comics too long," mancuso says. "back in 1964, the fbi had five black agents. three were chauffeurs for j. edgar hoover, and two cleaned his house." at the core of mr. loggia's mancuso is his world-weary truculence. he describes a reporter as "miss first amendment." he describes a drowned corpse as "esther williams." and when he's told "try a little tenderness," he shoots back "i'm going home to try a little linguine." yet for all his cynicism, he's at heart a closet idealist, a softy with a secret crush on truth, justice and the american way. he's the kind of guy who rescues trampled flags. if "mancuso fbi" has an intriguing central character, it also has a major flaw: it's wildly overwritten. executive producers steve sohmer and jeff bleckner (and writer/producers ken solarz and steve bello) have revved this show up to the breaking point. to start, there's always a crisis -- and someone always worries, "what if the press gets a hold of this?" at least once an episode we see protestors marching around screaming slogans. at least once mancuso's boss yells "in here -- now," and proceeds to dress his investigator down: "you are a dinosaur . . . a hangover in a $10 suit . . . one more word and you are out on a park bench, mister." finally, of course, the boss gives in, but he's still yelling: "i find myself explaining anything to teddy kennedy, you'll be chasing stolen cars in anchorage." in fact, throughout "mancuso fbi," we don't get words or lines -- we get speeches. witnesses shout, scream, pontificate: ". . . a dream that the planet could be saved from itself and from the sadistic dumb creatures who try to tear down every decent man who raises his voice." and mancuso himself is investigating at the top of his lungs: "how the hell can you live with yourself?" he erupts at a politician. "you twist people's trust. you built your career on prejudice and hate. the scars will be here years after the polls close." in each show, mancuso gets to unleash similar harangues: "where the hell are they gonna live when people like you turn the world into a big toxic waste dump? you're the real criminal here . . . and what you did wasn't just a murder -- it was a crime against humanity." and, at least once a show, someone delivers the line "get off that soapbox." now that's advice the writers should take to heart. they have a series with a good character, some interesting, even occasionally surprising plot lines, and they're ruining it. why, when a key witness disappears, does mancuso trash her apartment, tearing down drapes, smashing walls? it's a bizarre and totally inappropriate reaction, all to add more pizzazz to a script that's already overdosing on pizzazz. that's not plot. that's not character. that's hyperventilating. there is a scene at the end of the first week's show where mancuso attends the unveiling of the memorial to his dead partner david. asked to say a few words, he pulls out his crumpled piece of paper and tries to talk, but he's too choked up to get the words out. he bangs on the piece of paper in frustration, then turns and walks away. it was a profoundly moving moment for series television, and robert loggia's acting resonated in the silence. there's a pretty good program inside all the noise of "mancuso fbi." if the show's creators could just let themselves be quiet for a little, they might just hear it.
with a twist of the wrist boys with tops, and frisbee tossers, and p.r. types with bees in their bonnet, have a goal in common, all of them try to put the right spin on it. -- george o. ludcke. net gain investment letters now abound, i really like to read them; if i peruse enough, i've found i've no time left to heed them! -- bern sharfman. daffynition tv evangelist: salesparson. -- marguerite whitley may.
texaco inc. has purchased an oil-producing company in texas for $476.5 million, its first major acquisition since its legal brawl with pennzoil co. began more than four years ago. the white plains, n.y., oil company said friday that it had acquired tana production corp., a subsidiary of trt energy holdings inc., for $95.1 million in cash, with the rest to be paid in shares of a new, non-voting issue of preferred stock. tana, which holds properties in 17 oil and gas fields in south texas, will provide texaco with mostly gas reserves. the fields contain recoverable reserves of 435 billion cubic feet of natural gas and four million barrels of oil. "this acquisition is another indication of texaco's commitment to increase the company's reserve base," said chief executive officer james w. kinnear. texaco has also been attempting to sell oil properties. at least two years ago, the company put 60 million barrels of oil reserves on the block. they were either too small or uneconomic to maintain, the company said. not all of those parcels have yet been sold. texaco acquired tana before it completed those sales because tana's properties are high quality and near other fields texaco already owns, a company spokeswoman said. texaco, like many other oil companies, has been struggling to replace its falling oil and gas reserves. texaco's situation had become particularly complex because much of its effort had for years been focused on its brawl with pennzoil and then on new york investor carl c. icahn's attempt to take over the company. pennzoil had sued texaco for improperly interfering with its acquisition of a portion of getty oil co. eventually, texaco, which was forced into bankruptcy proceedings by that litigation, settled its fight with pennzoil for $3 billion in 1986. mr. icahn, who played a key role in the settlement and attempted subsequently to take control of the company, sold his stake in texaco just last summer. completion of texaco's acquisition of tana is subject to government approval under the hart-scott-rodino antitrust improvements act.
california struggled with the aftermath of a bay area earthquake. as aftershocks shook the san francisco bay area, rescuers searched through rubble for survivors of tuesday's temblor, and residents picked their way through glass-strewn streets. in oakland, hopes faded for finding any more survivors within the concrete and steel from the collapse of an interstate highway. at least 270 people were reported killed and 1,400 injured in the rush-hour tremor that caused billions of dollars of damage along 100 miles of the san andreas fault. bush declared the region a major disaster area and the military was mobilized to prevent looting. the baseball commissioner said the third game of the world series between the giants and the athletics would be played tuesday in candlestick park. honecker was ousted as leader of east germany amid growing unrest. the 77-year-old official, who oversaw the building of the berlin wall, was removed during a meeting of the 163-member communist party central committee in east berlin. honecker, who was reported ill following gall-bladder surgery in august, said he was resigning for health reasons. he was succeeded by internal-security chief egon krenz, 52, a hard-liner who quickly ruled out any sharing of power with pro-democracy groups. honecker's departure came after weeks of street protests and an exodus to the west of east germans who had become disenchanted with his rule. hungary adopted constitutional changes to form a democratic system. at a nationally televised legislative session in budapest, the parliament overwhelmingly approved changes formally ending one-party domination in the country, regulating free elections by next summer and establishing the office of state president to replace a 21-member council. the country was renamed the republic of hungary. like other soviet bloc nations, it had been known as a "people's republic" since the voting for new laws followed dissolution of hungary's communist party this month and its replacement by a western-style socialist party. the space shuttle atlantis blasted into orbit from cape canaveral, fla., and its crew of five astronauts launched the nuclear-powered galileo space probe on a flight to the planet jupiter. the $1.4 billion robot spacecraft's exploratory mission is to take six years. the shuttle is slated to return monday to california. south korea's president roh addressed a joint house-senate meeting and urged patience over u.s. demands for the opening of seoul's markets to more american goods, saying trade issues would be "resolved to mutual satisfaction." he also said tragic results could follow any "hint of weakening" of the u.s. defense commitment to seoul. the census bureau reported that 13.1% of the u.s. population, or 31.9 million people, were living in poverty in 1988. last year's figure was down from 13.4% in 1987 and marked the fifth consecutive annual decline in the poverty rate. per capita income rose 1.7% to $13,120, but median family income fell 0.2%. the bush administration accused israeli prime minister shamir of hindering peace efforts in the mideast with "unhelpful" and disappointing statements. shamir said tuesday that he was prepared to risk a policy conflict with the u.s. over an egyptian plan to hold direct israeli-palestinian talks, which the premier's likud bloc opposes. cuba was elected to the u.n. security council for the first time since its castro-led revolution 30 years ago. the election was by secret ballot in the general assembly. the u.s. didn't openly oppose cuba's seating as the latin american council delegate. britain's prime minister thatcher told a commonwealth summit in kuala lumpur, malaysia, that sanctions against south africa were "utterly irresponsible," officials said. but other nations at the opening of the 49-nation meeting of britain and its former colonies pressed for continued or stronger embargoes in an effort to end apartheid. arab officials in saudi arabia said three-week-old talks by lebanese lawmakers aimed at ending lebanon's civil war appeared about to collapse. christian legislators are insisting on a syrian troop pullout from lebanon before agreeing to political changes giving the nation's moslems a greater role in beirut's government. colombia's judges launched a 72-hour strike to press security demands following tuesday's murder of a high court justice in medellin. the country's narcotics traffickers claimed responsibility for the slaying. most of the country's 20,000 judges and judicial employees joined the work stoppage.
insurers are facing billions of dollars in damage claims from the california quake. but most businesses in the bay area, including silicon valley, weren't greatly affected. computer and software companies in the region are expecting virtually no long-term disruption in shipments. also, investors quickly singled out stocks of companies expected to profit or suffer from the disaster. leveraged buy-outs may be curbed by two rules in pending congressional legislation. the provisions, in deficit-reduction bills recently passed by the house and senate, could raise the price tags of such deals by up to 10% and cool the takeover boom. a bill giving the transportation department the power to block airline leveraged buy-outs cleared a house panel. but secretary skinner said he would urge bush to veto the bill. housing starts sank 5.2% in september to a seven-year low. the drop, following a 6.2% decline in august, indicates the industry is still being hurt by the fed's anti-inflation battle. ibm plans to buy back $1 billion of its common shares, a move likely to help the computer giant's battered stock. the buy-back, which wasn't a complete surprise, was announced after the stock market had closed. a capital-gains tax cut plan has been worked out by senate republicans. a similar proposal may be introduced soon by senate democrats. british airways said it is seeking improved terms and a sharply lower price in any revised bid for united air's parent. the british carrier also confirmed it isn't committed to going forward with any new bid. ual's stock fell $6.25, to $191.75. stock prices rose slightly as trading slowed, while bonds ended little changed despite a slumping dollar. the dow jones industrials gained 4.92, to 2643.65. but investors remain wary about stocks, partly because of turmoil in the junk-bond market. b.a.t industries may delay part of its defensive restructuring plan, including the sale of its saks fifth avenue and marshall field units. the british conglomerate cited the recent turmoil in financial markets. wcrs group announced a major restructuring that largely removes it from the advertising business. the london-based concern will sell most of its ad unit to france's eurocom. commodore international expects to post its second consecutive quarterly loss because of weak personal computer sales in some markets. jaguar hopes to reach a friendly accord with general motors within a month that may involve producing a cheaper executive model. sears is negotiating to refinance its sears tower for close to $850 million, sources said. the retailer was unable to find a buyer for the building. whitbread of britain put its spirits division up for sale, setting off a scramble among distillers. the business includes beefeater gin. markets -- stocks: volume 166,900,000 shares. dow jones industrials 2643.65, up 4.92; transportation 1247.87, off 6.40; utilities 213.97, off 0.57. bonds: shearson lehman hutton treasury index 3371.36, off commodities: dow jones futures index 129.90, up 0.18; spot index 130.36, up 0.39. dollar: 141.45 yen, off 1.30; 1.8485 marks, off 0.0182.
the dollar finished softer yesterday, tilted lower by continued concern about the stock market. "we're trading with a very wary eye on wall street," said trevor woodland, chief corporate trader at harris trust & savings bank in new york. "no one is willing to place a firm bet that the stock market won't take another tumultuous ride." news of the major earthquake in california tuesday triggered a round of dollar sales in early asian trade, but most foreign-exchange dealers said they expect the impact of the quake on financial markets to be short-lived. despite the dollar's lackluster performance, some foreign-exchange traders maintain that the u.s. unit remains relatively well bid. harris trust's mr. woodland noted that the unit continues to show resilience in the face of a barrage of "headline negatives" in recent weeks, including rate increases in europe and japan, aggressive central bank intervention, a 190-point plunge in new york stock prices, an unexpectedly poor u.s. trade report and action by the federal reserve to nudge u.s. rates lower. while mr. woodland doesn't predict a significant climb for the u.s. unit in light of recent moves in interest rates around the world, he noted that "its downside potential is surprisingly and -- for dollar bulls -- "impressively" limited. in late new york trading yesterday, the dollar was quoted at 1.8485 marks, down from 1.8667 marks late tuesday, and at 141.45 yen, down from 142.75 yen late tuesday. sterling was quoted at $1.5920, up from $1.5753 late tuesday. in tokyo thursday, the u.s. currency opened for trading at 140.97 yen, down from wednesday's tokyo close of 142.10 yen. since friday's dive in stock market prices, the fed has injected reserves into the banking system in an effort to calm the markets and avert a repeat of 1987's stock market debacle. some analysts note that after last week's stock market tailspin and tuesday's california earthquake, it's hard to gauge where the central bank wants the key federal funds rate. they say that the earthquake, by preventing many banks from operating at full capacity, has given the fed an additional reason to keep liquidity at a high level. the fed did, in fact, execute $1.5 billion of liquidity-enhancing customer repurchase agreements, the third set of repurchase orders in three days. analysts said the additional liquidity should tend to reduce the federal funds rate. for now, traders say the foreign exchange market is scrutinizing both federal funds and events on wall street. they note that the dollar remains extremely vulnerable to the slightest bad news from the stock exchange. indeed, the u.s. unit edged lower as the dow jones industrial average dropped about 13 points in early trading. a slight recovery in the stock market gave currency traders confidence to push the dollar higher before the unit dropped back by day's end. some dealers noted that nervousness over the recent sharp dive in stock prices could intensify following suggestions by bank of japan governor satoshi sumita that appeared to advise japanese investors to be very careful in investing in u.s. leveraged buy-outs. dealers suggest that the only positive news on the horizon that could detract attention from equities transactions is september's u.s. consumer price data. the figures, due for release friday, are expected to show an uptick in inflation to 4.8% from 4.7% in august. if the figures show a hefty rise in inflation, they could militate against easing by the fed. on the commodity exchange in new york, gold for current delivery rose $1.30 to $368.70 an ounce in moderate trading. estimated volume was three million ounces. in early trading in hong kong thursday, gold was at $368.15 an ounce.
a new drug to prevent the rejection of transplanted organs has been successfully used on more than 100 patients at the university of pittsburgh, according to researchers. the drug, which is still in the experimental phase, hasn't been approved yet by the food and drug admistration, and its long-term effects are unknown. but researchers say the drug, called fk-506, could revolutionize the transplantation field by reducing harmful side effects and by lowering rejection rates. rejection has been the major obstacle in the approximately 30,000 organ transplants performed world-wide each year. researchers began using the drug in february on patients who had received kidney, liver, heart and pancreas transplants. only two of 111 transplants have been rejected. the drug, discovered in 1984, is metabolized from soil fungus found in japan. the pittsburgh patients are the first humans to be given the drug, which is made by fujisawa pharmaceutical co. "we're shocked by it, because it's worked so fast," said dr. thomas e. starzl, director of the university of pittsburgh transplantation program, at a news conference here yesterday. "we consider it a life-saving drug, like one for aids," said dr. john fung, an immunologist at the university of pittsburgh. researchers say they believe fk-506 is 100 times more effective than the traditional anti-rejection drug, cyclosporine, made by swiss pharmaceutical giant sandoz ltd. they are also encouraged by the relatively mild side effects of fk-506, compared with cyclosporine, which can cause renal failure, morbidity, nausea and other problems. "the side effects {of cyclosporine} have made the penalty for its success rather high," dr. starzl said. dr. fung said that fk-506 would not be available in the market for at least a year, and that the fda approval process usually takes three years to five years. there are no firm plans to expand the experimental program beyond the university of pittsburgh, whose hospital performs the most transplants in the world. researchers couldn't estimate the cost of the drug when it reaches the market, but they said fk-506 will enable patients to cut hospital stays by 50% and reduce the number of blood tests used to monitor the dosage of cyclosporine and other drugs among transplant recipients. dr. starzl said the research has been largely financed by the national institute of health and by university funds, and that fujisawa didn't give the hospital any grants. he said that the research team had no financial stake in the drug. "we've known for six months the effect of this drug, and our advice to our people has been not to buy the company's stock," dr. starzl said, adding that profiting from fk-506 wouldn't be ethical.
mutual-fund czar john m. templeton has put his money where his moniker is, pouring $1.4 million into one of his own funds, the templeton value fund. mr. templeton owns shares in several of the 33 funds that his firm manages, but only in three of the 10 available to u.s. investors, according to filings with the securities and exchange commission. those are templeton global income, templeton emerging markets and now the value fund. why did he add the value fund to the list? because he's very bullish on the emerging growth stocks that make up the fund's portfolio, mr. templeton said from his bahamas hideaway. "emerging growth stocks haven't been popular in america for years, they've been neglected," he said, and their prices often trail the market as a whole. mr. templeton's 147,300-share purchase in the closed-end fund came before the u.s. stock market's plunge last friday, but still proved slightly profitable. mr. templeton bought his shares in several separate purchases between aug. 30 and sept. 28, according to reports with the sec. he bought at share prices ranging from $9.375 to $9.625. the fund closed yesterday in new york stock exchange composite trading at $9.625, up 12.5 cents. in addition, mr. templeton received a dividend of 22 cents a share oct. 5. river run: a senior vice president and a vice president at james river corp. sold the majority of their shares in the richmond, va., paper-products concern in late august and early september, reports filed with the sec show. the executives, who got $30.88 a share for the stock, showed good timing. in big board trading yesterday, james river shares closed at $28.375, down 12.5 cents. on sept. 6, robert joseph sherry, the firm's senior vice president of employee and public relations, sold 4,000 shares, leaving himself with 1,062 shares of james river. including a sale of stock last february, mr. sherry has sold 88% of his stake in the company this year, according to sec filings. mr. sherry declined to comment when asked about the sales. james a. toney, a vice president, sold 1,500 shares aug. 28. he still has 1,143 shares, according to sec files. mr. toney also declined to comment. interest-rate player: cincinnati gas & electric co. tops the companies portion of the accompanying insider trading table this week. three of the utility's directors have at least doubled their holdings in the company since july. the largest purchase was by dudley taft, who bought 4,400 shares for $125,075. mr. taft, who is also president of taft broadcasting co., said he bought the shares because he keeps a utility account at the brokerage firm of salomon brothers inc., which had recommended the stock as a good buy. salomon brothers confirmed that it has had a buy recommendation on the stock for about two years. "cincinnati gas & electric is in good shape," mr. taft said, and utilities are "a good investment because interest rates are going down." mr. taft paid an average of $28.43 for each share. the stock closed yesterday on the big board at $28.75, down 12.5 cents. the two other directors bought 1,000 and 1,900 shares, respectively, at prices between $28.15 a share and $28.75 a share, filings with the sec show. the two couldn't be reached for comment. a company spokesman said he couldn't explain their sudden bullishness. "i don't know of any news or anything unusual happening here," said bruce stoecklin, director of media services. peter pae in pittsburgh contributed to this article.
the stock market's dizzying gyrations during the past few days have made a lot of individual investors wish they could buy some sort of insurance. after all, they won't soon forget the stock bargains that became available after the october 1987 crash. but while they want to be on the alert for similar buying opportunities now, they're afraid of being hammered by another terrifying plunge. the solution, at least for some investors, may be a hedging technique that's well known to players in the stock-options market. called a "married put," the technique is carried out by purchasing a stock and simultaneously buying a put option on that stock. it's like "fire insurance," says harrison roth, the senior options strategist at cowen & co. because a put option gives its owner the right, but not the obligation, to sell a fixed number of shares of the stock at a stated price on or before the option's expiration date, the investor is protected against a sudden drop in the stock's price. but most investment advisers don't recommend using married puts all the time. that's because the cost of buying put options eats into an investor's profit when stock prices rise. "this is the type of fire insurance you only buy when the nearby woods are on fire," says mr. roth. "you always want your house insured, but you don't always feel the need for your investments to be insured." in addition to hedging new stock purchases, the married-put technique can be used to protect stocks that an investor already owns. in either case, the investor faces three possible outcomes: -- if the stock goes up in price between now and the put's expiration date, the put will probably expire worthless. the investor will be out the cost of the put, which is called the "premium," and this loss will reduce the stock-market profit. -- if the stock stays at the same price between now and the put's expiration date, the investor's loss will be limited to the cost of the put, less any amount realized from a closing sale of the put. the worst-case scenario would be if the put expires worthless. -- if the price of the stock declines, the put will increase in value. once the stock price is less than the exercise price, or "strike price," of the put, the gain will match the loss on the stock dollar for dollar. the put establishes a minimum selling price for the stock during its life. when a stock falls below the put's strike price, the investor simply sells the stock at a loss and simultaneously sells the put at a profit. or, the investor can exercise the put, by tendering the stock to his or her broker in return for payment from another investor who has sold a put on the same stock. brokers handle such transactions through the options clearing corp., which guarantees all option trades. the accompanying table shows how this strategy would work for three stocks. though not reflected in the table, an investor should know that the cost of the option insurance can be partially offset by any dividends that the stock pays. for example, tenneco inc. pays a quarterly dividend of 76 cents, which would be received before the february option expires and, thus, reduce the cost of using the technique by that amount. in this case, the investor's risk wouldn't exceed 3.6% of the total investment. to simplify the calculations, commissions on the option and underlying stock aren't included in the table. there are more than 650 stocks on which options may be bought and sold, including some over-the-counter stocks. but some investors might prefer a simpler strategy then hedging their individual holdings. they can do this by purchasing "index puts," which are simply put options on indexes that match broad baskets of stocks. for instance, the most popular index option is the s&p 100 option, commonly called the oex. it is based on the stocks that make up standard & poor's 100-stock index. unlike options on individual issues, index options are settled only in cash, and no stock is ever tendered. but while index options are convenient, they have several disadvantages. for one thing, an investor's portfolio might not closely match the s&p 100. as a result, the oex insurance may or may not fully protect an investor's holdings in the event of a market decline. in addition, oex options were suspended from trading last friday afternoon, after the stock-market sell-off got under way and trading in the s&p-500 futures contract was halted. so an investor who wanted to realize a profit on oex puts after the trading suspension would have been out of luck. on the other hand, only a handful of individual issues were suspended from trading on friday. normally, once the underlying investment is suspended from trading, the options on those investments also don't trade. ultimately, whether the insurance provided by purchasing puts is worthwhile depends on the cost of the options. that cost rises in times of high market volatility. but it still might be cheaper than taking a major hit. the protection from using married puts is clearly superior to that afforded by another options strategy some investors consider using during troubled times: selling call options on stocks the investor owns. a call option is similar to a put, except that it gives its owner the right to buy shares at a stated price until expiration. selling a call option gives an investor a small buffer against a stock-market decline. that's because it reduces the cost of the stock by the amount of premium received from the sale of the call. but if the price of the stock rises above the strike price of the option, the stock is almost certain to be called away. and in that case, the investor misses out on any major upside gain. these calculations exclude the effect of commissions paid and dividends received from the stock. all prices are as of monday's close.
hopes for quick enactment of pending deficit-reduction legislation faded as efforts to streamline the house version in advance of a house-senate conference broke down. house leaders had hoped to follow the senate's lead by getting an agreement from house committee chairmen under which they would drop items that wouldn't reduce the fiscal 1990 budget deficit from the house-passed bill before the negotiations with the senate began. but the effort became snagged on the question of what would become of other issues, ranging from cutting the capital-gains tax to child care to repeal of catastrophic-illness insurance. "many members feel there are important features of the house bill that should be enacted," speaker thomas foley (d., wash.) said. "if there is any support for reducing the bill, it is conditioned on their desire to see them passed in another form." now those items will be discussed in a house-senate conference, which could begin as soon as today, with the expectation that they could either be resolved there or placed into other legislation. "you've got to give these chairmen the opportunity to see if they can work things out," said house budget committee chairman leon panetta (d., calif.). "this is a democratic process -- you can't slam-dunk anything around here." white house budget director richard darman has said he would continue to press to keep the capital-gains provision in the final version of the bill unless the house drops many of its costly provisions. senate leaders had hoped to be able to send a compromise version of the measure to president bush by the end of the week, but speaker foley said that wasn't likely. failure to pass the bill meant that $16.1 billion in across-the-board spending cuts took effect monday under the gramm-rudman budget law. the bill must be enacted before the cuts can be restored.
a surprising surge in the u.s. trade deficit raised fears that the nation's export drive has stalled, and caused new turmoil in financial markets. the merchandise trade deficit widened in august to $10.77 billion, the commerce department reported, a sharp deterioration from july's $8.24 billion and the largest deficit of any month this year. exports fell for the second month in a row, while imports rose to a record. "this is one of the worst trade releases we've had since the dollar troughed out in 1987," said geoffrey dennis, chief international economist at james capel inc. like most analysts, mr. dennis was hesitant to read too much into one month's numbers; but he said, "it indicates perhaps that the balance in the u.s. economy is not as good as we've been led to believe." the number had a troubling effect on wall street, suggesting that more fundamental economic problems may underlie last friday's stock market slide. the dow jones industrial average tumbled more than 60 points after the report's release, before recovering to close 18.65 points lower at 2638.73. "this bad trade number raises some deeper issues about the market decline," said norman robertson, chief economist for mellon bank. "it raises questions about more deep-seated problems, the budget deficit and the trade deficit and the seeming lack of ability to come to grips with them." the trade report drew yet another unsettling parallel to october 1987. on oct. 14 of that year, the announcement of an unusually large august trade deficit helped trigger a steep market decline. the slide continued until the record 508-point market drop on oct. 19. in 1987, however, the news was the latest in a string of disappointments on trade, while the current report comes after a period of improvement. the bleak trade report was played down by the bush administration. commerce secretary robert mosbacher called the worsening trade figures "disappointing after two very good months." and white house spokesman marlin fitzwater said the deficit was "an unwelcome increase," adding that "we're hopeful that it simply is a one-month situation and will turn around." but the figures reinforced the view of many private analysts that the improvement in the u.s. trade deficit has run out of steam. "the figures today add further evidence to support the view that the improvement in the u.s. trade deficit has essentially stalled out at a level of about a $110 billion annual rate," said jeffrey scott, a research fellow at the institute for international economics here. "that's still an improvement over last year, but it leads one to conclude that basically we've gotten all the mileage we can out of past dollar depreciation and past marginal cuts in the federal budget deficit." exports declined for the second consecutive month in august, slipping 0.2% to $30.41 billion, the commerce department reported. imports, on the other hand, leaped 6.4% to a record $41.18 billion. not only was august's deficit far worse than july's, but the government revised the july figure substantially from the $7.58 billion deficit it had initially reported last month. many economists contend that deep cuts in the u.s. budget deficit are needed before further trade improvement can occur. that's because the budget deficit feeds an enormous appetite in this country for both foreign goods and foreign capital, overwhelming the nation's capacity to export. "people are sick and tired of hearing about these deficits, but the imbalances are still there and they are still a problem," said mr. robertson. in addition, the rise in the value of the dollar against foreign currencies over the past several months has increased the price of u.s. products in overseas markets and hurt the country's competitiveness. since march, exports have been virtually flat. at the same time, william t. archey, international vice president at the u.s. chamber of commerce, notes: "clearly the stronger dollar has made imports more attractive" by causing their prices to decline. most economists expect the slowing u.s. economy to curb demand for imports. but they foresee little substantial progress in exports unless the dollar and the federal budget deficit come down. "the best result we could get from these numbers would be to see the administration and congress get serious about putting the u.s. on an internationally competitive economic footing," said howard lewis, vice president of international economic affairs at the national association of manufacturers. "that must start with cutting the federal budget deficit." august's decline in exports reflected decreases in sales of industrial supplies, capital goods and food abroad and increases in sales of motor vehicles, parts and engines. the jump in imports stemmed from across-the-board increases in purchases of foreign goods. the numbers were adjusted for usual seasonal fluctuations. alan murray contributed to this article. (in billions of u.s. dollars, not seasonally adjusted) *newly industrialized countries: singapore, hong kong, taiwan, south korea source: commerce department
ashton-tate corp. reported a net loss of $19.4 million, or 74 cents a share, for the third quarter, which was burdened by severance costs and the expense of upgrading its database software inventories. the software company said revenue slid 28% to $53.9 million. this contrasts with the year-ago quarter, when the company had net income of $11.7 million, or 45 cents a share, on revenue of $75.7 million. for the nine months, ashton-tate had a loss of $27.6 million, or $1.05 a share. in the year-ago period, the company had profit of $34.3 million, or $1.32 a share. revenue in the period slid almost 8% to $203.2 million from about $220 million last year. edward m. esber, chairman, president and chief executive officer, attributed the decline to reduced domestic revenue because of $4.9 million spent to upgrade existing software inventories to the new database iv version 1.1, and $1.8 million spent on the recent reduction in work force. he said the company was "encouraged by feedback" it received from selected customers now testing version 1.1. the red ink came as no surprise to wall street, but analysts said they saw ominous hints of a further delay in volume shipments of version 1.1, a harbinger of continued losses in the fourth quarter. "the loss is in line with our expectations," said john c. maxwell iii, an analyst with dillon, read & co. in new york. he added gross margins and operating profit "eroded quite dramatically" from the prior quarter, along with sales of existing software product lines like multimate and framework. "the success of a new product in the database line is needed. and while the company hasn't made a definite statement, it now looks like that's not going to be anytime soon," mr. maxwell said. the company said in a statement that it expects to ship new products "during the next two quarters." "it now looks like database iv version 1.1 isn't going to be {widely} available until the first quarter of 1990," said david bayer, an analyst with montgomery securities in san francisco. "this is the second delay now in getting the product out the door. it does prolong the pain somewhat." mr. maxwell said unless the company can start shipments of the new product sometime this quarter, the fourth-quarter loss is likely to be "comparable to the third quarter's." if the company can start to ship during this quarter, it could stem some, if not all of the red ink, he said. in national over-the-counter trading, ashton-tate closed yesterday at $10 a share, up 62.5 cents.
tuesday, october 17, 1989 the key u.s. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but don't always represent actual transactions. prime rate: 10 1/2%. the base rate on corporate loans at large u.s. money center commercial banks. federal funds: 8 11/16% high, 8 5/8% low, 8 5/8% near closing bid, 8 11/16% offered. reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $1 million or more. source: fulton prebon (u.s.a.) inc. discount rate: 7%. the charge on loans to depository institutions by the new york federal reserve bank. call money: 9 3/4% to 10%. the charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral. commercial paper placed directly by general motors acceptance corp.: 8.40% 30 to 44 days; 8.325% 45 to 59 days; 8.10% 60 to 89 days; 8% 90 to 119 days; 7.85% 120 to 149 days; 7.70% 150 to 179 days; 7.375% 180 to 270 days. commercial paper: high-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $1,000: 8.50% 30 days; 8.40% 60 days; 8.375% 90 days. certificates of deposit: 8.05% one month; 8.02% two months; 8% three months; 7.98% six months; 7.95% one year. average of top rates paid by major new york banks on primary new issues of negotiable c.d.s, usually on amounts of $1 million and more. the minimum unit is $100,000. typical rates in the secondary market: 8.50% one month; 8.50% three months; 8.45% six months. bankers acceptances: 8.38% 30 days; 8.28% 60 days; 8.23% 90 days; 8.13% 120 days; 8.03% 150 days; 7.93% 180 days. negotiable, bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order. london late eurodollars: 8 5/8% to 8 1/2% one month; 8 9/16% to 8 7/16% two months; 8 9/16% to 8 7/16% three months; 8 1/2% to 8 3/8% four months; 8 7/16% to 8 5/ 16% five months; 8 7/16% to 8 5/16% six months. london interbank offered rates (libor): 8 5/8% one month; 8 9/16% three months; 8 7/16% six months; 8 7/16% one year. the average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the london market based on quotations at five major banks. foreign prime rates: canada 13.50%; germany 8.50%; japan 4.875%; switzerland 8.50%; britain 15%. these rate indications aren't directly comparable; lending practices vary widely by location. treasury bills: results of the monday, october 16, 1989, auction of short-term u.s. government bills, sold at a discount from face value in units of $10,000 to $1 million: 7.37% 13 weeks; 7.42% 26 weeks. federal home loan mortgage corp. (freddie mac): posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days. 9.88%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 7.875%, 2% rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. federal national mortgage association (fannie mae): posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days (priced at par) 9.80%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 8.70%, 6/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. merrill lynch ready assets trust: 8.50%. annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days; not a forecast of future returns.
tribune co., helped by a hefty boost in performance at its broadcasting and entertainment operations, said net income jumped 21% in its third quarter ended sept. 24 on a 3% increase in revenue. the broadcasting and newspaper concern, based in chicago, said net was $62.7 million, or 77 cents a primary share, up from $51.6 million, or 69 cents a share. per-share figures this year reflect $6.8 million in preferred-share dividends; the 1988 quarter didn't have such a payout. revenue rose to $590.7 million from $575.1 million. nine-month net climbed 19% to $174.8 million, or $2.21 a primary share, from $147.5 million, or $1.94 a share. nine-month per-share figures for 1989 reflect $12.9 million in preferred dividends that had no counterpart in the year-earlier quarter. revenue rose 4% to $1.79 billion. in new york stock exchange composite trading friday, tribune closed at $49.375, down $4.75.
prospect group inc., whose recent hostile tender offer for recognition equipment inc. failed for lack of financing, apparently has gained a measure of control over the troubled company anyway. as part of what a recognition spokeswoman termed an "amiable agreement," prospect group will wind up with control of top management posts and an increased stake in the maker of data management equipment. in a management restructuring, thomas l. ringer resigned as chairman, chief executive and a director, while israel sheinberg resigned as a director. mr. sheinberg remains as executive vice president. thomas m. hurley and robert a. vanourek, who had been designated to take over recognition's top spots had prospect's tender offer succeeded, were named co-chief executives and directors. mr. hurley was formerly a vice president and general manager of an avery international division; mr. vanourek was a former group vice president of pitney bowes inc. in addition, the agreement calls for gilbert h. lamphere, chairman of prospect group's executive committee, to be named chairman of a restructured board that will include four new independent directors. also named to the revised board was thomas a. loose, recognition's senior vice president and general counsel. prospect, a new york-based leveraged buy-out firm, also agreed to invest $15 million in recognition, which in turn agreed to repurchase as much as $20 million of its stock. that would increase prospect's ownership of the company's fully-diluted shares outstanding to 20% from 14.1%. under the agreement, prospect is permitted to increase its stake in recognition to 30%. beyond that, prospect said it wouldn't offer to acquire additional shares for less than $11.25 a share during the next year or less than $14.06 a share during the subsequent two years. recognition also said it obtained a commitment from chemical bank and bank of boston to convert an estimated $18 million in bank debt to a new, 24-month secured term loan to be repaid through the sale of certain assets. in august, recognition said it was in violation of certain terms of its debt agreements with bank lenders because of a $3.9 million loss for the third quarter ended july 31. the company attributed the loss to declining revenue and litigation costs relating to criminal charges against the company and two former executives, william g. moore jr. and robert w. reedy. the former executives were indicted last october on charges of fraud, theft and conspiracy related to efforts by the company to win $400 million in postal service contracts. recognition equipment said it expected to put the agreement with prospect to a vote of its stockholders at a special meeting in january. in new york stock exchange composite trading, recognition rose 87.5 cents to $6.625. prospect slipped 25 cents to $10.50 in national over-the-counter trading.
the former president of firstsouth f.a., a defunct arkansas thrift, pleaded guilty to conspiring to inflate the institution's earnings by concealing worthless loan guarantees. roderick d. reed iii, who was also chief operating officer of firstsouth, could receive a maximum sentence of five years in federal prison and a $250,000 fine. a sentencing date hasn't been set. mr. reed admitted he conspired to conceal an agreement not to enforce loan guarantees executed by dallas real-estate developers a. starke taylor iii and george s. watson, both of whom were firstsouth stockholders. neither mr. taylor nor mr. watson have been charged with criminal wrongdoing. by concealing the non-enforcement agreement, certain transactions with messrs. taylor and watson were entered on firstsouth's books as loans, allowing the thrift to report fees and interest as current income, according to the u.s. attorney's office in little rock, ark. the conspiracy was part of an effort by mr. reed to hide firstsouth's shaky financial condition from federal regulators, according to federal prosecutors and regulators. the $1.68 billion thrift was declared insolvent and closed in december 1986. firstsouth's former chairman and chief executive officer, howard weichern, is also charged with conspiring to conceal the agreements with messrs. watson and taylor. mr. weichern is scheduled for trial jan. 3 before federal judge stephen reasoner of little rock.
i approached "mastergate," larry gelbart's new comedy at the criterion center, with considerable trepidation. nothing, i assumed, would be more hopelessly dated than a political satire on the iran-contra affair. i had underestimated, however, both mr. gelbart's wit and the persistence of scandal in washington. though the play clearly is framed around the events of iran-contra, it takes in the wide sweep of scandals over the past 30 years. in fact, at one point merry chase (melinda mullins), a cool, carefully coiffed television announcer, recites a list of a dozen or more scandals of recent years, concluding with those affecting the department of housing and urban development and the savings and loan industry. onstage, a congressional hearing is in progress, complete with elegant crystal chandelier overhead and a lifesize reproduction of the signing of the constitution in the background. the witness table is center stage and below it, the paraphernalia for the ever-present media, in this case tnn, the total news network. not only are there camera operators on all sides, but the proceedings are shown on monitors throughout the theater. the metaphor of theater is not entirely coincidental. mr. gelbart clearly feels that all the participants in a congressional hearing -- the witnesses, the lawyers, the interrogators and the news media -- are performers. as the story of "mastergate" unfolds, we learn that the internal revenue service confiscated one of the properties of a foreign financier who owes the government millions in taxes. the man, it seems, has a lichtenstein corporation, licensed in libya and sheltered in the bahamas. he himself lives in a "consecutive series of unnumbered houses in a town in switzerland." the property seized by the irs is a hollywood film studio, master pictures incorporated (mpi). supposedly the irs will sell off the assets of mpi, but before it can, a lowly irs agent is called into the hospital room of wylie slaughter, the dying head of the central intelligence agency. the lowly agent, abel lamb, who as you might guess, is being led to the slaughter, is ordered to take over the studio. soon the studio is producing a $40 million picture called "tet, the motion picture," to distinguish it from "tet, the offensive," as well as "tet, the book" and "tet, the album." the picture, to be made in the central american country of san elvador, is a cover for sending $800 million of arms to los otros, the rebel group attempting to regain neighboring ambigua, which has been taken over by the leftist dictator dr. overtega, a former podiatrist, who leads a revolutionary band of foot soldiers. the man handling all this for the now-deceased slaughter is major manley battle, mr. gelbart's stand in for col. oliver north. director michael engler has assembled a top-flight cast to carry out the impersonations of well-known political figures and to play the stock characters who invariably show up at congressional hearings. daniel von bargen is ramrod-stiff but totally assured as major battle, mixing just the right brand of self-righteousness and patriotism; jeff weiss is fire, brimstone and teary-eyed emotionalism as the far-right senator who serves as a friendly interrogator of major battle; zach grenier is maddeningly officious playing a succession of lawyers; joseph daly has the perfect "aw, shucks" demeanor of george bush in his portrayal of the vice president; and ann mcdonough is first-rate as a succession of witnesses' wives. with one she is pregnant, with major battle she is knitting an american flag, and as the vice president's wife she rushes in with white hair, wearing a tailored suit and pearls, imitating barbara bush's gestures down to the last detail. though it's clear that mr. gelbart's sympathies do not lie with the far right, it's also true that he is evenhanded in dispensing his satirical jabs, taking sharp aim at senators and congressmen of all stripes and particularly at the media. mr. gelbart also has fun with language. "mastergate" is subtitled "a play on words," and mr. gelbart plays that game as well as anyone. he describes a mastergate flunky as one who experienced a "meteoric disappearance" and found himself "handling blanket appeals at the bureau of indian affairs." this interest in words goes beyond puns and playfulness, however. mr. gelbart deplores the obfuscation, the circumlocution and the debasement of language he sees on all sides. as the hearings begin, the self-important sen. bowman (jerome kilty) announces: "let me emphaticize one thing at the outset: we are not looking for hides to skin nor goats to scape." major battle himself speaks in pure pentagonese: "without further monetary-stroke-military aid, scores of ambiguan freedom lovers, who had gone way out on their life and limbs for us, were literally cut off at the knees without a paddle." at another point he intones: "publicity is a small price to pay for secrecy." the evening is short -- 95 minutes without an intermission -- but even so, as the play progresses the thrust of mr. gelbart's satire loses its sharpness as his targets pop up ever more predictably. most of the evening, though, is filled with rare and welcome wit. in "mastergate," mr. gelbart has provided us not just one but two commodities that have all but disappeared from the broadway theater: sharp political satire and an even sharper appreciation of the value of language.
the federal national mortgage association set up a three-member office of the chairman and elected james a. johnson as vice chairman, effective jan. 1. mr. johnson has been a managing director at shearson lehman hutton since 1985, and before that was president of public strategies, a washington consulting firm. he is well-known in democratic circles, having been executive assistant to vice president walter mondale and chairman of mr. mondale's 1984 presidential campaign. at fannie mae, he will take responsibility for the corporation's financial and legal areas and will work with david maxwell, chairman and chief executive officer, and roger birk, president and chief operating officer, on strategic planning. mr. johnson, 45 years old, has been a consultant on strategy to fannie mae for the past 3 1/2 years. in an interview, he said fannie mae faces a number of challenges with the restructuring of the thrift industry and the push to broaden its activities overseas. "there's no shortage of major things to do," he said. fannie mae also said james a. aliber, chairman of first federal of michigan and a director since 1985, moved up the date of his retirement from the board to accommodate mr. johnson's election as a director. the board has 13 members elected by holders and five presidential appointees. fannie mae, a federally chartered, shareholder-owned corporation, operates a secondary market for mortgage loans, buying loans from lenders, packaging some into securities for sale to investors and keeping the rest in its portfolio.
canada, which is preparing to speed up tariff cuts with the u.s., recorded a 47% narrowing in its trade surplus with the u.s. in august, statistics canada, a federal agency, reported. u.s. exports to canada jumped 11.2% in august from july while u.s. imports from canada rose only 2.7%. as a result, canada's trade surplus with the u.s. narrowed to c$656.5 million (us$558 million) in august from c$1.23 billion (us$1.04 billion) in july. u.s. exports benefited in august from heavy canadian spending on new plant and equipment and a pickup in canadian auto demand, canadian officials said. the u.s. and canada, which do more trade than any other pair of nations, are to meet next month to arrange an acceleration of planned tariff cuts under the u.s.-canada free trade agreement. industries in both countries have requested a speedup of tariff cuts on hundreds of products. some tariffs were eliminated when the trade pact took effect jan. 1. the remainder were to be phased out in five or 10 annual installments, with all tariffs eliminated by january 1998. the two countries aim to reach an agreement by early december on a package of accelerated tariff cuts that would take effect early next year. canadian officials said the trade pact has kindled an export interest among many small canadian companies that previously had little or no foreign sales. for such businessmen, the canadian government is organizing 55 missions this year to u.s. states bordering on canada. the businessmen are introduced to potential agents and distributors and instructed in trade procedures. the u.s. commerce department is planning to try out similar trips on u.s. businessmen in coming months under its canada first! outreach program. participants in the u.s. missions to canada are to be assisted by members of the service corps of retired executives, a volunteer group, in dealing with their export challenges. the canadian government also has recently opened new trade offices in san diego; san juan, puerto rico; miami; princeton, n.j., and denver, bringing the total number of such canadian offices in the u.s. to 27. the u.s. has six trade promotion offices in canada. canada's export effort has been blunted by robust home market demand and by an 18% appreciation of the canadian dollar against its u.s. counterpart in the past three years that has made canadian goods more costly in the u.s. canada's trade surplus with all countries narrowed to c$203.5 million in august from c$528.3 million in july, statistics canada said.
bank of new england corp., seeking to streamline its business after a year of weak earnings and mounting loan problems, said it will sell some operations and lay off 4% of its work force. the bank holding company also reported that third-quarter profit dropped 41%, to $42.7 million, or 61 cents a share, from the year-earlier $72.3 million, or $1.04 a share. among its restructuring measures, the company said it plans to sell 53 of its 453 branch offices and to lay off 800 employees. altogether, employment is expected to decline to less than 16,000 from the current level of about 18,000. walter connolly, chairman, said in an interview that the company expects to record pretax gains of $100 million to $125 million from the sale of its leasing operations and of certain financial processing services. in a prepared statement, the company said it expects to realize those gains before year end. nonperforming assets continued to pile up in the latest quarter, rising to $900 million, or 3.52% of loans and leases, from $667 million, or 2.68%, at the end of the second quarter. some $170 million of the $233 million increase in nonperforming loans was related to real estate, and roughly three-quarters of that was in the troubled new england market, according to richard driscoll, vice chairman. mr. driscoll said that, despite continued weakness in the region's real estate market, bank of new england expects the rate of increase in nonperforming assets to slow in coming quarters. mr. connolly noted that net third-quarter charge-offs, at $63 million, improved slightly from the $67 million in the second quarter. and he indicated that more substantial improvement is expected in the next couple of quarters. the company increased its loan loss reserve to $354 million from $342 million at the end of the second quarter. total assets slipped to $31.4 billion, from $32 billion as of june 30. among other restructuring measures, the bank said it will close its loan production offices in chicago, new york and philadelphia. the chicago office figured prominently in the bank's problems earlier this year, when $65 million in loans to chicago businessman william stoecker went sour. in an internal memorandum to employees, messrs. connolly and driscoll described the restructuring as an effort to continue rationalizing operations assembled during a series of mergers over the past five years.
blinder international enterprises inc., the parent of beleaguered penny-stockbroker blinder, robinson & co., said its shareholders approved a previously announced name change to intercontinental enterprises inc. "the parent company is diversifying into other industries around the world," said president meyer blinder in explaining the name change. "everytime we talked about blinder international, {people} thought it was the brokerage house." mr. blinder said the change wasn't related to the brokerage's recent troubles, which have included sharp declines in earnings, run-ins with the securities regulators and lawsuits by former customers. the company said it expects the name change to take effect within a week.
olin corp. said third-quarter net income rose 26% on the strength of its chemical business. net was $24 million, or $1.15 a share, up from $19 million, or 90 cents a share, a year earlier. sales rose 7.4% to $580 million from $540 million. olin said its chemical segment had profit of $22 million, up from $15 million a year ago, largely because of gains in electrochemicals such as caustic soda. the company said the gains were tied to volume increases and higher prices. the market for electrochemicals include the paper, water-purification and textile industries. the chemical segment had a $6 million gain on the sale of ammonia and urea businesses, which was offset by a $6 million charge for future environmental expenditures. profit in olin's defense and ammunition segment rose to $8 million from $7 million. the metals segment, hurt by a strike, had break-even results, against $3 million a year ago. in the first nine months, net rose 21% to $93 million, or $4.52 a share, from $77 million, or $3.62 a share a year ago. sales rose 13% to $1.91 billion from $1.69 billion. in new york stock exchange composite trading, olin closed at $58.50 a share, down 25 cents.
gte corp. and mci communications corp. reported strong earnings gains to record levels for the third quarter. southwestern bell corp. and cincinnati bell posted slight declines. gte corp. gte said net income rose 18%, aided by higher long-distance calling volumes and an increase in telephone lines in service. pretax operating profit from telephone operations rose 8.2% but profits from telecommunications products and electrical products were flat. revenues rose 8.8% to $4.35 billion from $4.0 billion. the company said the quarter included a 10% increase in local-exchange usage for long-distance calling and a 5% increase in the number of access lines in service. earlier rate reductions in texas and california reduced the quarter's revenue and operating profit $55 million; a year earlier, operating profit in telephone operations was reduced by a similar amount as a result of a provision for a reorganization. revenue in the telecommunications products and services unit rose 27% to $728.8 million, but operating profit was unchanged at $26.3 million, partly because of start-up expenses. electrical products' sales fell to $496.7 million from $504.5 million with higher world-wide lighting volume offset by lower domestic prices and the impact of weaker currencies in europe and south america. operating profit of $37.2 million was unchanged. in composite trading on the new york stock exchange, gte rose $1.25 to $64.125. mci communications corp. mci, which stepped up efforts to sell long-distance telephone service to residential customers, reported a 59% jump in earnings. revenue rose 23% to $1.67 billion from $1.36 billion. operating profit grew 57% to $269 million from $171 million, while operating margins rose to 16.1% from 15.9% the previous quarter and 12.6% a year ago. daniel akerson, mci chief financial officer, said the company sees further improvements in operating margins. "we think we can take it to the 18% range over next 18 to 24 months," he said. in national over-the-counter trading, mci fell $2.625 to $42.375. charles schellke, an analyst with smith barney, harris upham & co., said some investors apparently expected slightly better revenue growth. the company said that residential traffic grew faster than business traffic and attributed that to its new primetime calling plan that competes with american telephone & telegraph's reach out america plan. mci claims about 12% of the overall long-distance telephone market but just under 10% of the $23 billion residential market. it has been trying to improve its share of the residential market. the company wants its business mix to more closely match that of at&t -- a step it says will help prevent cross subsidization. mr. akerson said mci recorded "another solid cash positive quarter," its fourth in a row, but declined to comment on whether the company is considering a dividend or is planning any acquisition. the current quarter, he said, "looks fine. we think revenue will continue to grow and that we can control costs and thus improve profitability." southwestern bell corp. southwestern bell corp. said net dropped 8.7%, mainly the result of four extraordinary items: a franchise tax refund that its southwestern bell telephone co. unit received last year; a production shift of several yellow pages directories to the fourth quarter from the third; a rate refund in missouri and a one-time adjustment to phone company revenues. revenue slipped 1.2% to $2.21 billion from $2.23 billion. the earnings drop had been expected. chairman zane e. barnes said southwestern bell's "businesses are healthy and are continuing to grow." the company reported a 3.1% increase in the number of access lines in service, and also said its southwestern bell mobile systems unit added 30,000 new customers, with a current total of about 333,000. southwestern shares fell 50 cents to $55.875 in composite trading on the new york stock exchange. cincinnati bell inc. cincinnati bell inc. said net declined 1.8%. the company noted that the year-ago period was particularly strong, with an increase of nearly 70%. revenue jumped nearly 17% to $223.3 million from $191.4 million. in composite trading on the new york stock exchange, cincinnati bell fell 25 cents to $29. the company said that the number of access lines dropped slightly in the quarter, a decline attributed to seasonal fluctuations. for the year, however, access lines in service have increased 5.5%. chairman d.h. hibbard said the company has set a new five year goal of doubling revenues to about $1.8 billion while steadily increasing net.
a consortium of private investors operating as ljh funding co. said it has made a $409 million cash bid for most of l.j. hooker corp. 's real-estate and shopping-center holdings. the $409 million bid includes the assumption of an estimated $300 million in secured liabilities on those properties, according to those making the bid. the group is led by jay shidler, chief executive officer of shidler investment corp. in honolulu, and a. boyd simpson, chief executive of the atlanta-based simpson organization inc. mr. shidler's company specializes in commercial real-estate investment and claims to have $1 billion in assets; mr. simpson is a developer and a former senior executive of l.j. hooker. "the assets are good, but they require more money and management" than can be provided in l.j. hooker's current situation, said mr. simpson in an interview. "hooker's philosophy was to build and sell. we want to build and hold." l.j. hooker, based in atlanta, is operating with protection from its creditors under chapter 11 of the u.s. bankruptcy code. its parent company, hooker corp. of sydney, australia, is currently being managed by a court-appointed provisional liquidator. sanford sigoloff, chief executive of l.j. hooker, said yesterday in a statement that he has not yet seen the bid but that he would review it and bring it to the attention of the creditors committee. the $409 million bid is estimated by mr. simpson as representing 75% of the value of all hooker real-estate holdings in the u.s. not included in the bid are bonwit teller or b. altman & co., l.j. hooker's department-store chains. the offer covers the massive 1.8 million-square-foot forest fair mall in cincinnati, the 800,000 square-foot richland fashion mall in columbia, s.c., and the 700,000 square-foot thornton town center mall in thornton, colo. the thornton mall opened sept. 19 with a bigg's hypermarket as its anchor; the columbia mall is expected to open nov. 15. other hooker properties included are a 20-story office tower in midtown atlanta, expected to be completed next february; vacant land sites in florida and ohio; l.j. hooker international, the commercial real-estate brokerage company that once did business as merrill lynch commercial real estate, plus other shopping centers. the consortium was put together by hoare govett, the london-based investment banking company that is a subsidiary of security pacific corp. "we don't anticipate any problems in raising the funding for the bid," said allan campbell, the head of mergers and acquisitions at hoare govett, in an interview. hoare govett is acting as the consortium's investment bankers. according to people familiar with the consortium, the bid was code-named project klute, a reference to the film "klute" in which a prostitute played by actress jane fonda is saved from a psychotic businessman by a police officer named john klute. l.j. hooker was a small home-building company based in atlanta in 1979 when mr. simpson was hired to push it into commercial development. the company grew modestly until 1986, when a majority position in hooker corp. was acquired by australian developer george herscu, currently hooker's chairman. mr. herscu proceeded to launch an ambitious, but ill-fated, $1 billion acquisition binge that included bonwit teller and b. altman & co., as well as majority positions in merksamer jewelers, a sacramento chain; sakowitz inc., the houston-based retailer, and parisian inc., the southeast department-store chain. eventually mr. simpson and mr. herscu had a falling out over the direction of the company, and mr. simpson said he resigned in 1988. since then, hooker corp. has sold its interest in the parisian chain back to parisian's management and is currently attempting to sell the b. altman & co. chain. in addition, robert sakowitz, chief executive of the sakowitz chain, is seeking funds to buy out the hooker interest in his company. the merksamer chain is currently being offered for sale by first boston corp. reached in honolulu, mr. shidler said that he believes the various hooker malls can become profitable with new management. "these aren't mature assets, but they have the potential to be so," said mr. shidler. "managed properly, and with a long-term outlook, these can become investment-grade quality properties."
ripples from the strike by 55,000 machinists union members against boeing co. reached air carriers friday as america west airlines announced it will postpone its new service out of houston because of delays in receiving aircraft from the seattle jet maker. peter otradovec, vice president for planning at the phoenix, ariz., carrier, said in an interview that the work stoppage at boeing, now entering its 13th day, "has caused some turmoil in our scheduling" and that more than 500 passengers who were booked to fly out of houston on america west would now be put on other airlines. mr. otradovec said boeing told america west that the 757 it was supposed to get this thursday wouldn't be delivered until nov. 7 -- the day after the airline had been planning to initiate service at houston with four daily flights, including three nonstops to phoenix and one nonstop to las vegas. now, those routes aren't expected to begin until jan. boeing is also supposed to send to america west another 757 twin-engine aircraft as well as a 737 by year's end. those, too, are almost certain to arrive late. at this point, no other america west flights -- including its new service at san antonio, texas; newark, n.j.; and palmdale, calif. -- have been affected by the delays in boeing deliveries. nevertheless, the company's reaction underscores the domino effect that a huge manufacturer such as boeing can have on other parts of the economy. it also is sure to help the machinists put added pressure on the company. "i just don't feel that the company can really stand or would want a prolonged walkout," tom baker, president of machinists' district 751, said in an interview yesterday. "i don't think their customers would like it very much." america west, though, is a smaller airline and therefore more affected by the delayed delivery of a single plane than many of its competitors would be. "i figure that american and united probably have such a hard time counting all the planes in their fleets, they might not miss one at all," mr. otradovec said. indeed, a random check friday didn't seem to indicate that the strike was having much of an effect on other airline operations. southwest airlines has a boeing 737-300 set for delivery at the end of this month and expects to have the plane on time. "it's so close to completion, boeing's told us there won't be a problem," said a southwest spokesman. a spokesman for amr corp. said boeing has assured american airlines it will deliver a 757 on time later this month. american is preparing to take delivery of another 757 in early december and 20 more next year and isn't anticipating any changes in that timetable. in seattle, a boeing spokesman explained that the company has been in constant communication with all of its customers and that it was impossible to predict what further disruptions might be triggered by the strike. meanwhile, supervisors and non-striking employees have been trying to finish some 40 aircraft -- mostly 747 and 767 jumbo jets at the company's everett, wash., plant -- that were all but completed before the walkout. as of friday, four had been delivered and a fifth plane, a 747-400, was supposed to be flown out over the weekend to air china. no date has yet been set to get back to the bargaining table. "we want to make sure they know what they want before they come back," said doug hammond, the federal mediator who has been in contact with both sides since the strike began. the investment community, for one, has been anticipating a speedy resolution. though boeing's stock price was battered along with the rest of the market friday, it actually has risen over the last two weeks on the strength of new orders. "the market has taken two views: that the labor situation will get settled in the short term and that things look very rosy for boeing in the long term," said howard rubel, an analyst at cyrus j. lawrence inc. boeing's shares fell $4 friday to close at $57.375 in composite trading on the new york stock exchange. but mr. baker said he thinks the earliest a pact could be struck would be the end of this month, hinting that the company and union may resume negotiations as early as this week. still, he said, it's possible that the strike could last considerably longer. "i wouldn't expect an immediate resolution to anything." last week, boeing chairman frank shrontz sent striking workers a letter, saying that "to my knowledge, boeing's offer represents the best overall three-year contract of any major u.s. industrial firm in recent history." but mr. baker called the letter -- and the company's offer of a 10% wage increase over the life of the pact, plus bonuses -- "very weak." he added that the company miscalculated the union's resolve and the workers' disgust with being forced to work many hours overtime. in separate developments: -- talks have broken off between machinists representatives at lockheed corp. and the calabasas, calif., aerospace company. the union is continuing to work through its expired contract, however. it had planned a strike vote for next sunday, but that has been pushed back indefinitely. -- united auto workers local 1069, which represents 3,000 workers at boeing's helicopter unit in delaware county, pa., said it agreed to extend its contract on a day-by-day basis, with a 10-day notification to cancel, while it continues bargaining. the accord expired yesterday. -- and boeing on friday said it received an order from martinair holland for four model 767-300 wide-body jetliners valued at a total of about $326 million. the planes, long range versions of the medium-haul twin-jet, will be delivered with pratt & whitney pw4060 engines. pratt & whitney is a unit of united technologies inc. martinair holland is based in amsterdam. a boeing spokeswoman said a delivery date for the planes is still being worked out "for a variety of reasons, but not because of the strike." bridget o'brian contributed to this article.
atco ltd. said its utilities arm is considering building new electric power plants, some valued at more than one billion canadian dollars (us$851 million), in great britain and elsewhere. c.s. richardson, atco's senior vice president, finance, said its 50.1%-owned canadian utilities ltd. unit is reviewing cogeneration projects in eastern canada, and conventional electric power generating plants elsewhere, including britain, where the british government plans to allow limited competition in electrical generation from private-sector suppliers as part of its privatization program. "the projects are big. they can be c$1 billion plus," mr. richardson said. "but we wouldn't go into them alone," and canadian utilities' equity stake would be small, he said. "ideally, we'd like to be the operator {of the project} and a modest equity investor. our long suit is our proven ability to operate" power plants, he said. mr. richardson wouldn't offer specifics regarding atco's proposed british project, but he said it would compete for customers with two huge british power generating companies that would be formed under the country's plan to privatize its massive water and electric utilities. britain's government plans to raise about #20 billion ($31.05 billion) from the sale of most of its giant water and electric utilities, beginning next month. the planned electric utility sale, scheduled for next year, is alone expected to raise #13 billion, making it the world's largest public offering. under terms of the plan, independent generators would be able to compete for 15% of customers until 1994, and for another 10% between 1994 and 1998. canadian utilities had 1988 revenue of c$1.16 billion, mainly from its natural gas and electric utility businesses in alberta, where the company serves about 800,000 customers. "there seems to be a move around the world to deregulate the generation of electricity," mr. richardson said, and canadian utilities hopes to capitalize on it. "this is a real thrust on our utility side," he said, adding that canadian utilities is also mulling projects in underdeveloped countries, though he would be specific. canadian utilities isn't alone in exploring power generation opportunities in britain, in anticipation of the privatization program. "we're certainly looking at some power generating projects in england," said bruce stram, vice president, corporate strategy and corporate planning, with enron corp., houston, a big natural gas producer and pipeline operator. mr. stram said enron is considering building gas-fired power plants in the u.k. capable of producing about 500 megawatts of power at a cost of about $300 million to $400 million.
kaufman & broad home corp. said it formed a $53.4 million limited partnership subsidiary to buy land in california suitable for residential development. the partnership, kaufman & broad land development venture limited partnership, is a 50-50 joint venture with a trust created by institutional clients of heitman advisory corp., a unit of heitman financial corp., a real estate advisory, management and development company with offices in chicago and beverly hills, calif. kaufman & broad, a home building company, declined to identify the institutional investors. the land to be purchased by the joint venture hasn't yet received zoning and other approvals required for development, and part of kaufman & broad's job will be to obtain such approvals. the partnership runs the risk that it may not get the approvals for development, but in return, it can buy land at wholesale rather than retail prices, which can result in sizable savings, said bruce karatz, president and chief executive officer of kaufman & broad. "there are really very few companies that have adequate capital to buy properties in a raw state for cash. typically, developers option property, and then once they get the administrative approvals, they buy it," said mr. karatz, adding that he believes the joint venture is the first of its kind. "we usually operate in that conservative manner." by setting up the joint venture, kaufman & broad can take the more aggressive approach of buying raw land, while avoiding the negative impacts to its own balance sheet, mr. karatz said. the company is putting up only 10% of the capital, although it is responsible for providing management, planning and processing services to the joint venture. "this is one of the best ways to assure a pipeline of land to fuel our growth at a minimum risk to our company," mr. karatz said.
rjr nabisco inc. is disbanding its division responsible for buying network advertising time, just a month after moving 11 of the group's 14 employees to new york from atlanta. a spokesman for the new york-based food and tobacco giant, taken private earlier this year in a $25 billion leveraged buy-out by kohlberg kravis roberts & co., confirmed that it is shutting down the rjr nabisco broadcast unit, and dismissing its 14 employees, in a move to save money. the spokesman said rjr is discussing its network-buying plans with its two main advertising firms, fcb/leber katz and mccann erickson. "we found with the size of our media purchases that an ad agency could do just as good a job at significantly lower cost," said the spokesman, who declined to specify how much rjr spends on network television time. an executive close to the company said rjr is spending about $140 million on network television time this year, down from roughly $200 million last year. the spokesman said the broadcast unit will be disbanded dec. 1, and the move won't affect rjr's print, radio and spot-television buying practices. the broadcast group had been based in new york until a year ago, when rjr's previous management moved it to atlanta, the company's headquarters before this summer. one employee with the group said rjr moved 11 employees of the group back to new york in september because "there was supposed to be a future." he said the company hired three more buyers for the unit within the past two weeks, wooing them from jobs with advertising agencies. the rjr spokesman said the company moved the 11 employees to new york last month because the group had then been in the midst of purchasing ad time for the networks' upcoming season. "the studies {on closing the unit} couldn't be completed until now," he said. the group's president, peter chrisanthopoulos, wasn't in his office friday afternoon to comment.
the u.s., which is finalizing its steel-import quotas, is allocating a larger share of its steel market to developing and newly industrialized countries which have relatively unsubsidized steel industries. meanwhile, the u.s. has negotiated a significant cut in japan's steel quota, and made only a minor increase to the steel allotment for the european community. brazil, similar to mexico and south korea, is expected to negotiate a somewhat bigger share of the u.s. market than it had under the previous five-year steel quotas, which expired sept. 30. brazil and venezuela are the only two countries that haven't completed steel talks with the u.s. for the year ending oct. 1, 1990. in recent years, u.s. steelmakers have supplied about 80% of the 100 million tons of steel used annually by the nation. of the remaining 20% needed, the steel-quota negotiations allocate about 15% to foreign suppliers, with the difference supplied mainly by canada -- which isn't included in the quota program. other countries that don't have formal steel quotas with the u.s., such as taiwan, sweden and argentina, also have supplied steel. some of these countries have in recent years made informal agreements with the u.s. that are similar to quotas. the bush administration earlier this year said it would extend steel quotas, known as voluntary restraint agreements, until march 31, 1992. it also said it would use that two-and-a-half year period to work toward an international consensus on freeing up the international steel trade, which has been notoriously managed, subsidized and protected by governments. the u.s. termed its plan, a "trade liberalization program," despite the fact that it is merely an extension. mexico, which was one of the first countries to conclude its steel talks with the u.s., virtually doubled its quota to 0.95% of the u.s. steel market from 0.48% under the previous quotas. south korea, which had 1.9% under the previous quotas, is set to get a small increase to about 1.95%. that increase rises to slightly more than 2% of the u.s. market if a joint korean-u.s. steel project is included. meanwhile, brazil is expected to increase its allowance from the 1.43% share it has had in recent years. the ec and japan -- the u.s.'s largest steel suppliers -- haven't been filling their quotas to the full extent. the ec steel industry, which has been coping with strong european demand, has been supplying about 5% of the u.s. market compared with recent quotas of about 6.7%. japan has been shipping steel to total about 4.5% of the u.s. market compared with a quota of 5.9%. in the recent talks, the ec had its quota increased about 300,000 tons, to 7% of the u.s. market from 6.7% in 1988. but its quota has been as high as 6.9% in 1984. japan, however, has agreed to cut its quota to about 5% from 5.9% previously. japan, the ec, brazil, mexico and south korea provide about 80% of the steel imported to the u.s. under the quota program. the balance is supplied by a host of smaller exporters, such as australia and venezuela. the u.s. had about an extra 2% of the domestic steel market to give to foreign suppliers in its quota talks. that was essentially made up of a 1% increase in the overall quota program and 1% from cutting japan's allowance. negotiators from the white house trade office will repeat these quota negotiations next year when they will have another 1% of the u.s. steel market to allocate. these optional 1%-a-year increases to the steel quota program are built into the bush administration's steel-quota program to give its negotiators leverage with foreign steel suppliers to try to get them to withdraw subsidies and protectionism from their own steel industries.
elcotel inc. expects fiscal second-quarter earnings to trail 1988 results, but anticipates that several new products will lead to a "much stronger" performance in its second half. elcotel, a telecommunications company, had net income of $272,000, or five cents a share, in its year-earlier second quarter, ended sept. 30. revenue totaled $5 million. george pierce, chairman and chief executive officer, said in an interview that earnings in the most recent quarter will be about two cents a share on revenue of just under $4 million . the lower results, mr. pierce said, reflect a 12-month decline in industry sales of privately owned pay telephones, elcotel's primary business. although mr. pierce expects that line of business to strengthen in the next year, he said elcotel will also benefit from moving into other areas. foremost among those is the company's entrance into the public facsimile business, mr. pierce said. within the next year, elcotel expects to place 10,000 fax machines, made by minolta in japan, in hotels, municipal buildings, drugstores and other public settings around the country. elcotel will provide a credit-card reader for the machines to collect, store and forward billing data. mr. pierce said elcotel should realize a minimum of $10 of recurring net earnings for each machine each month. elcotel has also developed an automatic call processor that will make further use of the company's system for automating and handling credit-card calls and collect calls. automatic call processors will provide that system for virtually any telephone, mr. pierce said, not just phones produced by elcotel. the company will also be producing a new line of convenience telephones, which don't accept coins, for use in hotel lobbies, office lobbies, hospitality lounges and similar settings. mr. pierce estimated that the processors and convenience phones would produce about $5 of recurring net earnings for each machine each month.
measuring cups may soon be replaced by tablespoons in the laundry room. procter & gamble co. plans to begin testing next month a superconcentrated detergent that will require only a few spoonfuls per washload. the move stems from lessons learned in japan where local competitors have had phenomenal success with concentrated soapsuds. it also marks p&g's growing concern that its japanese rivals, such as kao corp., may bring their superconcentrates to the u.s. the cincinnati consumer-products giant got clobbered two years ago in japan when kao introduced a powerful detergent, called attack, which quickly won a 30% stake in the japanese markets. "they don't want to get caught again," says one industry watcher. retailers in phoenix, ariz., say p&g's new powdered detergent -- to be called cheer with color guard -- will be on shelves in that market by early november. a p&g spokeswoman confirmed that shipments to phoenix started late last month. she said the company will study results from this market before expanding to others. superconcentrates aren't entirely new for p&g. the company introduced a superconcentrated lemon cheer in japan after watching the success of attack. when attack hit the shelves in 1987, p&g's share of the japanese market fell to about 8% from more than 20%. with the help of lemon cheer, p&g's share is now estimated to be 12%. while the japanese have embraced the compact packaging and convenience of concentrated products, the true test for p&g will be in the $4 billion u.s. detergent market, where growth is slow and liquids have gained prominence over powders. the company may have chosen to market the product under the cheer name since it's already expanded its best-selling tide into 16 different varieties, including this year's big hit, tide with bleach. with superconcentrates, however, it isn't always easy to persuade consumers that less is more; many people tend to dump too much detergent into the washing machine, believing that it takes a cup of powder to really clean the laundry. in the early 1980s, p&g tried to launch here a concentrated detergent under the ariel brand name that it markets in europe. but the product, which wasn't as concentrated as the new cheer, bombed in a market test in denver and was dropped. p&g and others also have tried repeatedly to hook consumers on detergent and fabric softener combinations in pouches, but they haven't sold well, despite the convenience. but p&g contends the new cheer is a unique formula that also offers an ingredient that prevents colors from fading. and retailers are expected to embrace the product, in part because it will take up less shelf space. "when shelf space was cheap, bigger was better," says hugh zurkuhlen, an analyst at salomon bros. but with so many brands vying for space, that's no longer the case. if the new cheer sells well, the trend toward smaller packaging is likely to accelerate as competitors follow with their own superconcentrates. then retailers "will probably push the {less-established} brands out altogether," he says. competition is bound to get tougher if kao introduces a product like attack in the u.s. to be sure, kao wouldn't have an easy time taking u.s. market share away from the mighty p&g, which has about 23% of the market. kao officials previously have said they are interested in selling detergents in the u.s., but so far the company has focused on acquisitions, such as last year's purchase of andrew jergens co., a cincinnati hand-lotion maker. it also has a product-testing facility in california. some believe p&g's interest in a superconcentrated detergent goes beyond the concern for the japanese. "this is something p&g would do with or without kao," says mr. zurkuhlen.
with economic tension between the u.s. and japan worsening, many japanese had feared last week's visit from u.s. trade representative carla hills. they expected a new barrage of demands that japan do something quickly to reduce its trade surplus with the u.s. instead, they got a discussion of the need for the u.s. and japan to work together and of the importance of the long-term view. mrs. hills' first trip to japan as america's chief trade negotiator had a completely different tone from last month's visit by commerce secretary robert a. mosbacher. mr. mosbacher called for concrete results by next spring in negotiations over fundamental japanese business practices that supposedly inhibit free trade. he said such results should be "measurable in dollars and cents" in reducing the u.s. trade deficit with japan. but mrs. hills, speaking at a breakfast meeting of the american chamber of commerce in japan on saturday, stressed that the objective "is not to get definitive action by spring or summer, it is rather to have a blueprint for action." she added that she expected "perhaps to have a down payment . . . some small step to convince the american people and the japanese people that we're moving in earnest." how such remarks translate into policy won't become clear for months. american and japanese officials offered several theories for the difference in approach betwen mr. mosbacher and mrs. hills. many called it simply a contrast in styles. but some saw it as a classic negotiating tactic. others said the bush administration may feel the rhetoric on both sides is getting out of hand. and some said it reflected the growing debate in washington over pursuing free trade with japan versus some kind of managed trade. asked to compare her visit to mr. mosbacher's, mrs. hills replied: "i didn't hear every word he spoke, but as a general proposition, i think we have a very consistent trade strategy in the bush administration." yet more than one american official who sat in with her during three days of talks with japanese officials said her tone often was surprisingly "conciliatory." "i think my line has been very consistent," mrs. hills said at a news conference saturday afternoon. "i am painted sometimes as ferocious, perhaps because i have a ferocious list of statutes to implement. i don't feel very ferocious. i don't feel either hard or soft. i feel committed to the program of opening markets and expanding trade." when she met the local press for the first time on friday, mrs. hills firmly reiterated the need for progress in removing barriers to trade in forest products, satellites and supercomputers, three areas targeted under the super 301 provision of the 1988 trade bill. she highlighted exclusionary business practices that the u.s. government has identified. but her main thrust was to promote the importance of world-wide free trade and open competition. she said the trade imbalance was mainly due to macroeconomic factors and shouldn't be tackled by setting quantitative targets. at her news conference for japanese reporters, one economics journalist summed up the japanese sense of relief. "my impression was that you would be a scary old lady," he said, drawing a few nervous chuckles from his colleagues. "but i am relieved to see that you are beautiful and gentle and intelligent and a person of integrity." mrs. hills' remarks did raise questions, at least among some u.s. officials, about what exactly her stance is on u.s. access to the japanese semiconductor market. the u.s. share of the japanese market has been stuck around 10% for years. many americans have interpreted a 1986 agreement as assuring u.s. companies a 20% share by 1991, but the japanese have denied making any such promise. at one of her news conferences, mrs. hills said, "i believe we can do much better than 20%." but she stressed, "i am against managed trade. i will not enter into an agreement that stipulates to a percentage of the market."
traditional industries inc. said it expects to report a net loss for the fourth quarter that ended june 30 and is seeking new financing. the seller of photographic products and services said it is considering a number of financing alternatives, including seeking increases in its credit lines. traditional declined to estimate the amount of the loss and wouldn't say if it expects to show a profit for the year. in the year ended june 30, 1988, traditional reported net income of $4.9 million, or $1.21 a share. the company didn't break out its fourth-quarter results. in the latest nine months net income was $4.7 million, or $1.31 a share, on revenue of $44.3 million. separately, the company said it would file a delayed fiscal-year report with the securities and exchange commission "within approximately 45 days." it said the delay resulted from difficulties in resolving its accounting of a settlement with the federal trade commission. under an agreement filed in federal court in august to settle ftc objections to some traditional sales practices, traditional said it would establish a $250,000 trust fund to provide refunds to certain customers.
the oil industry's middling profits could persist through the rest of the year. major oil companies in the next few days are expected to report much less robust earnings than they did for the third quarter a year ago, largely reflecting deteriorating chemical prices and gasoline profitability. the gasoline picture may improve this quarter, but chemicals are likely to remain weak, industry executives and analysts say, reducing chances that profits could equal their year-earlier performance. the industry is "seeing a softening somewhat in volume and certainly in price in petrochemicals," glenn cox, president of phillips petroleum co., said in an interview. "that change will obviously impact third and fourth quarter earnings" for the industry in general, he added. he didn't forecast phillips's results. but securities analysts say phillips will be among the companies hard-hit by weak chemical prices and will probably post a drop in third-quarter earnings. so, too, many analysts predict, will exxon corp., chevron corp. and amoco corp. typical is what happened to the price of ethylene, a major commodity chemical produced in vast amounts by many oil companies. it has plunged 13% since july to around 26 cents a pound. a year ago ethylene sold for 33 cents, peaking at about 34 cents last december. a big reason for the chemical price retreat is overexpansion. beginning in mid-1987, prices began accelerating as a growing u.s. economy and the weak dollar spurred demand. companies added capacity furiously. now, greatly increased supplies are on the market, while the dollar is stronger, and domestic economic growth is slower. third-quarter profits from gasoline were weaker. "refining margins were so good in the third quarter of last year and generally not very good this year," said william randol, a securities analyst at first boston corp. oil company refineries ran flat out to prepare for a robust holiday driving season in july and august that didn't materialize. the excess supply pushed gasoline prices down in that period. in addition, crude oil prices were up some from a year earlier, further pressuring profitability. refiners say margins picked up in september, and many industry officials believe gasoline profits will rebound this quarter, though still not to the level of 1988's fourth quarter. during the 1988 second half, many companies posted record gasoline and chemical profits. crude oil production may turn out to be the most surprising element of companies' earnings this year. prices -- averaging roughly $2 a barrel higher in the third quarter than a year earlier -- have stayed well above most companies' expectations. demand has been much stronger than anticipated, and it typically accelerates in the fourth quarter. "we could see higher oil prices this year," said bryan jacoboski, an analyst at painewebber inc. that will translate into sharply higher production profits, particularly compared with last year when oil prices steadily fell to below $13 a barrel in the fourth quarter. while oil prices have been better than expected, natural gas prices have been worse. in the third quarter, they averaged about 5% less than they were in 1988. the main reason remains weather. last summer was notable for a heat wave and drought that caused utilities to burn more natural gas to feed increased electrical demand from air conditioning use. this summer, on the other hand, had milder weather than usual. "we've been very disappointed in the performance of natural gas prices," said mr. cox, phillips's president. "the lagging gas price is not going to assist fourth quarter performance as many had expected." going into the fourth quarter, natural gas prices are anywhere from 8% to 17% lower than a year earlier. for instance, natural gas currently produced along the gulf coast is selling on the spot market for around $1.47 a thousand cubic feet, down 13% from $1.69 a thousand cubic feet a year ago.
the bush administration, trying to blunt growing demands from western europe for a relaxation of controls on exports to the soviet bloc, is questioning whether italy's ing. c. olivetti & co. supplied militarily valuable technology to the soviets. most of the western european members of coordinating committee on multilateral export controls, the unofficial forum through which the u.s. and its allies align their export-control policies, are expected to argue for more liberal export rules at a meeting to be held in paris oct. 25 and 26. they plan to press specifically for a relaxation of rules governing exports of machine tools, computers and other high-technology products. but the bush administration says it wants to see evidence that all cocom members are complying fully with existing export-control procedures before it will support further liberalization. to make its point, it is challenging the italian government to explain reports that olivetti may have supplied the soviet union with sophisticated computer-driven devices that could be used to build parts for combat aircraft. the london sunday times, which first reported the u.s. concerns, cited a u.s. intelligence report as the source of the allegations that olivetti exported $25 million in "embargoed, state-of-the-art, flexible manufacturing systems to the soviet aviation industry." olivetti reportedly began shipping these tools in 1984. a state department spokesman acknowledged that the u.s. is discussing the allegations with the italian government and cocom, but declined to confirm any details. italian president francesco cossiga promised a quick investigation into whether olivetti broke cocom rules. president bush called his attention to the matter during the italian leader's visit here last week. olivetti has denied that it violated cocom rules, asserting that the reported shipments were properly licensed by the italian authorities. although the legality of these sales is still an open question, the disclosure couldn't be better timed to support the position of export-control hawks in the pentagon and the intelligence community. "it seems to me that a story like this breaks just before every important cocom meeting," said a washington lobbyist for a number of u.s. computer companies. the bush administration has sent conflicting signals about its export-control policies, reflecting unhealed divisions among several competing agencies. last summer, mr. bush moved the administration in the direction of gradual liberalization when he told a north atlantic treaty organization meeting that he would allow some exceptions to the cocom embargo of strategic goods. but more recently, the pentagon and the commerce department openly feuded over the extent to which cocom should liberalize exports of personal computers to the bloc. however, these agencies generally agree that the west should be cautious about any further liberalization. "there's no evidence that the soviet program to (illegally) acquire western technology has diminished," said a state department spokesman.
salomon brothers international ltd., a british subsidiary of salomon inc., announced it will issue warrants on shares of hong kong telecommunications ltd. the move closely follows a similar offer by salomon of warrants for shares of hongkong & shanghai banking corp. under the latest offer, hk$62.5 million (us$8 million) of three-year warrants will be issued in london, each giving buyers the right to buy one hong kong telecommunications share at a price to be determined friday. the 50 million warrants will be priced at hk$1.25 each and are expected to carry a premium to the share price of about 26%. in trading on the stock exchange of hong kong, the shares closed wednesday at hk$4.80 each. at this price, the shares would have to rise above hk$6.05 for subscribers to salomon's issue to profitably convert their warrants. while hong kong companies have in the past issued warrants on their own shares, salomon's warrants are the first here to be issued by a third party. salomon will "cover" the warrants by buying sufficient shares, or options to purchase shares, to cover its entire position. bankers said warrants for hong kong stocks are attractive because they give foreign investors, wary of volatility in the colony's stock market, an opportunity to buy shares without taking too great a risk. the hong kong telecommunications warrants should be attractive to buyers in europe, the bankers added, because the group is one of a handful of blue-chip stocks on the hong kong market that has international appeal.
financial corp. of santa barbara filed suit against former stock speculator ivan f. boesky and drexel burnham lambert inc., charging they defrauded the thrift by concealing their relationship when persuading it to buy $284 million in high-yield, high-risk junk bonds. in a suit filed in federal court thursday, the s&l alleged that a "disproportionate number" of the bonds it purchased in 1984 declined in value. financial corp. purchased the bonds, the suit alleged, after mr. boesky and drexel negotiated an agreement for vagabond hotels to purchase a 51% stake in the thrift for about $34 million. vagabond hotels was controlled by mr. boesky, who currently is serving a prison term for securities violations. officials at drexel said they hadn't seen the suit and thus couldn't comment. in addition to $33 million compensatory damages, the suit seeks $100 million in punitive damages. also named in the suit is ivan f. boesky corp. and northview corp., the successor company to vagabonds hotels. northview officials couldn't be located. financial corp. said it agreed to buy the bonds after a representative of ivan f. boesky corp. visited it in november 1983 and said financial corp. could improve its financial condition by purchasing the bonds. shortly before the visit, mr. boesky and drexel representives had met with financial corp. officials and had signed a letter of intent to acquire the 51% stake in the company. however, the agreement was canceled in june 1984. financial corp. purchased the bonds in at least 70 different transactions in 1984 and since then has realized $11 million in losses on them, the company said.
ideal basic industries inc. said its directors reached an agreement in principle calling for hofi north america inc. to combine its north american cement holdings with ideal in a transaction that will leave ideal's minority shareholders with 12.8% of the combined company. hofi, the north american holding company of swiss concern holderbank financiere glaris ltd., previously proposed combining its 100% stake in st. lawrence cement inc. and its 60% stake in dundee cement co. with its 67% stake in ideal. but hofi's first offer would have given ideal's other shareholders about 10% of the combined company. ideal's directors rejected that offer, although they said they endorsed the merger proposal. under the agreement, hofi will own 87.2% of the combined company. ideal's current operations will represent about 39.2% of the combined company. the transaction is subject to a definitive agreement and approval by ideal shareholders. ideal said it expects to complete the transaction early next year.
if a hostile predator emerges for saatchi & saatchi co., co-founders charles and maurice saatchi will lead a management buy-out attempt, an official close to the company said. financing for any takeover attempt may be problematic in the wake of friday's stock-market sell-off in new york and turmoil in the junk-bond market. but the beleaguered british advertising and consulting giant, which last week named a new chief executive officer to replace maurice saatchi, has been the subject of intense takeover speculation for weeks. last week, saatchi's largest shareholder, southeastern asset management, said it had been approached by one or more third parties interested in a possible restructuring. and carl spielvogel, chief executive officer of saatchi's big backer spielvogel bates advertising unit, said he had offered to lead a management buy-out of the company, but was rebuffed by charles saatchi. mr. spielvogel said he wouldn't launch a hostile bid. the executive close to saatchi & saatchi said that "if a bidder came up with a ludicrously high offer, a crazy offer which saatchi knew it couldn't beat, it would have no choice but to recommend it to shareholders. but {otherwise} it would undoubtedly come back" with an offer by management. the executive said any buy-out would be led by the current board, whose chairman is maurice saatchi and whose strategic guiding force is believed to be charles saatchi. mr. spielvogel isn't part of the board, nor are any of the other heads of saatchi's big u.s.-based ad agencies. the executive didn't name any price, but securities analysts have said saatchi would fetch upward of $1.3 billion. the executive denied speculation that saatchi was bringing in the new chief executive officer only to clean up the company financially so that the brothers could lead a buy-back. that speculation abounded friday as industry executives analyzed the appointment of the new chief executive, robert louis-dreyfus, who joins saatchi and becomes a member of its board on jan. 1. mr. louis-dreyfus, formerly chief executive of the pharmaceutical research firm ims international inc., has a reputation as a savvy financial manager, and will be charged largely with repairing saatchi's poor financial state. asked about the speculation that mr. louis-dreyfus has been hired to pave the way for a buy-out by the brothers, the executive replied, "that isn't the reason dreyfus has been brought in. he was brought in to turn around the company." separately, several saatchi agency clients said they believe the company's management shakeup will have little affect on them. "it hasn't had any impact on us, nor do we expect it to," said a spokeswoman for miller brewing co., a major client of backer spielvogel. john lampe, director of advertising at painewebber inc., a saatchi & saatchi advertising client, said: "we have no problem with the announcement, because we don't know what change it's going to bring about. we aren't going to change agencies because of a change in london." executives at backer spielvogel client avis inc., as well as at saatchi client philips lighting co., also said they saw no effect. executives at prudential-bache securities inc., a backer spielvogel client that is reviewing its account, declined comment. mr. spielvogel had said that prudential-bache was prepared to finance either a management buy-out and restructuring, or a buy-out of backer spielvogel alone, led by him. ad notes. . . . new account: california's glendale federal bank awarded its $12 million to $15 million account to the los angeles office of omnicom group's bbdo agency. the account was previously handled by davis, ball & colombatto advertising inc., a los angeles agency. account review: royal crown cola co. has ended its relationship with the boston office of hill, holliday, connors, cosmopulos. the account had billed about $6 million in 1988, according to leading national advertisers. not-guilty plea: as expected, young & rubicam inc. along with two senior executives and a former employee, pleaded not guilty in federal court in new haven, conn., to conspiracy and racketeering charges. the government has charged that they bribed jamaican officials to win the jamaica tourist board ad account in 1981. a spokesman for the u.s. attorney's office said extradition proceedings are "just beginning" for the other two defendants in the case, eric anthony abrahams, former jamaican tourism minister, and jamaican businessman arnold foote jr. korean agency: the samsung group and bozell inc. agreed to establish a joint venture advertising agency in south korea. bozell cheil corp., as the new agency will be called, will be based in seoul and is 70% owned by samsung and 30% owned by bozell. samsung already owns korea first advertising co., that country's largest agency. bozell joins backer spielvogel bates and ogilvy group as u.s. agencies with interests in korean agencies.
citing a payment from a supplier and strong sales of certain data-storage products, maxtor corp. said earnings and revenue jumped in its second quarter ended sept. 24. the maker of computer-data-storage products said net income rose to $4.8 million, or 23 cents a share, from year-earlier net of $1.1 million, or five cents a share. revenue soared to $117 million from $81.5 million. maxtor said its results were boosted by $2 million in payments received from a supplier, for a certain line of products that maxtor isn't going to sell anymore. maxtor said effects from discontinuing the line may have a positive effect on future earnings and revenue. a spokeswoman wouldn't elaborate, but the company said the discontinued product has never been a major source of revenue or profit. operationally, maxtor benefited from robust sales of products that store data for high-end personal computers and computer workstations. in the fiscal first half, net was $7 million, or 34 cents a share, up from the year-earlier $3.1 million, or 15 cents a share. revenue rose to $225.5 million from $161.8 million.
general motors corp., in a series of moves that angered union officials in the u.s. and canada, has signaled that as many as five north american assembly plants may not survive the mid-1990s as the corporation struggles to cut its excess vehicle-making capacity. in announcements to workers late last week, gm effectively signed death notices for two full-sized van assembly plants, and cast serious doubt on the futures of three u.s. car factories. gm is under intense pressure to close factories that became unprofitable as the giant auto maker's u.s. market share skidded during the past decade. the company, currently using about 80% of its north american vehicle capacity, has vowed it will run at 100% of capacity by 1992. just a month ago, gm announced it would make an aging assembly plant in lakewood, ga., the eighth u.s. assembly facility to close since 1987. now, gm appears to be stepping up the pace of its factory consolidation to get in shape for the 1990s. one reason is mounting competition from new japanese car plants in the u.s. that are pouring out more than one million vehicles a year at costs lower than gm can match. another is that united auto workers union officials have signaled they want tighter no-layoff provisions in the new big three national contract that will be negotiated next year. gm officials want to get their strategy to reduce capacity and the work force in place before those talks begin. the problem, however, is that gm's moves are coming at a time when uaw leaders are trying to silence dissidents who charge the union is too passive in the face of gm layoffs. against that backdrop, uaw vice president stephen p. yokich, who recently became head of the union's gm department, issued a statement friday blasting gm's "flagrant insensitivity" toward union members. the auto maker's decision to let word of the latest shutdowns and product reassignments trickle out in separate communiques to the affected plants showed "disarray" and an "inability or unwillingness to provide consistent information," mr. yokich said. gm officials told workers late last week of the following moves: production of full-sized vans will be consolidated into a single plant in flint, mich. that means two plants -- one in scarborough, ontario, and the other in lordstown, ohio -- probably will be shut down after the end of 1991. the shutdowns will idle about 3,000 canadian assembly workers and about 2,500 workers in ohio. robert white, canadian auto workers union president, used the impending scarborough shutdown to criticize the u.s.-canada free trade agreement and its champion, prime minister brian mulroney. but canadian auto workers may benefit from a separate gm move that affects three u.s. car plants and one in quebec. workers at plants in van nuys, calif., oklahoma city and pontiac, mich., were told their facilities are no longer being considered to build the next generation of the pontiac firebird and chevrolet camaro muscle cars. gm is studying whether it can build the new camaro-firebird profitably at a plant in st. therese, quebec, company and union officials said. that announcement left union officials in van nuys and oklahoma city uncertain about their futures. the van nuys plant, which employs about 3,000 workers, doesn't have a product to build after 1993. jerry shrieves, uaw local president, said the facility was asked to draw up plans to continue working as a "flex plant," which could build several different types of products on short notice to satisfy demand. at the oklahoma city plant, which employs about 6,000 workers building the eight-year-old a-body mid-sized cars, steve featherston, uaw local vice president, said the plant has no new product lined up, and "none of us knows" when the a-body cars will die. he said he believes gm has plans to keep building a-body cars into the mid-1990s. at pontiac, however, the camaro-firebird decision appears to erase uaw hopes that gm would reopen the shuttered assembly plant that last built the plastic-bodied, two-seater pontiac fiero model. the fiero plant was viewed as a model of union-management cooperation at gm before slow sales of the fiero forced the company to close the factory last year. union officials have taken a beating politically as a result. dissident uaw members have used the fiero plant as a symbol of labor-management cooperation's failure.
institut merieux s.a. of france said the canadian government raised an obstacle to its proposed acquisition of connaught biosciences inc. for 942 million canadian dollars (us$801.6 million). merieux said the government's minister of industry, science and technology told it that he wasn't convinced that the purchase is likely to be of "net benefit" to canada. canadian investment rules require that big foreign takeovers meet that standard. the french company said the government gave it 30 days in which to submit information to further support its takeover plan. both merieux and connaught are biotechnology research and vaccine manufacturing concerns. the government's action was unusual. alan nymark, executive vice president of investment canada, which oversees foreign takeovers, said it marked the first time in its four-year history that the agency has made an adverse net-benefit decision about the acquisition of a publicly traded company. he said it has reached the same conclusions about some attempts to buy closely held concerns, but eventually allowed those acquisitions to proceed. "this isn't a change in government policy; this provision has been used before," said jodi redmond, press secretary for harvie andre, canada's minister of industry, science and technology. mr. andre issued the ruling based on a recommendation by investment canada. spokesmen for merieux and connaught said they hadn't been informed of specific areas of concern by either the government or investment canada, but added they hope to have more information early this week. investment canada declined to comment on the reasons for the government decision. viren mehta, a partner with mehta & isaly, a new york-based pharmaceutical industry research firm, said the government's ruling wasn't unexpected. "this has become a very politicized deal, concerning canada's only large, world-class bio-research or pharmaceutical company," mr. mehta said. mr. mehta said the move that could allow the transaction to go ahead as planned could be an out-of-court settlement of connaught's dispute with the university of toronto. the university is seeking to block the acquisition of connaught by foreign interests, citing concerns about the amount of research that would be done in canada. the university is considering a settlement proposal made by connaught. while neither side will disclose its contents, mr. mehta expects it to contain more specific guarantees on research and development spending levels in canada than merieux offered to investment canada. some analysts, such as murray grossner of toronto-based richardson greenshields inc., believe the government ruling leaves the door open for other bidders, such as switzerland's ciba-geigy and chiron corp. of emeryville, calif. officials for the two concerns, which are bidding c$30 a share for connaught, couldn't be reached for comment. french state-owned rhone-poulenc s.a. holds 51% of merieux.
weatherford international inc. said it canceled plans for a preferred-stock swap but may resume payment of dividends on the stock, and added that it expects to publicly offer about 10 million common shares. the company said it planned to offer an undetermined number of common shares in exchange for the 585,000 shares of its preferred stock outstanding. the exchange ratio was never established. weatherford said market conditions led to the cancellation of the planned exchange. the energy-services concern said, however, that in january 1990, it may resume payments of dividends on the preferred stock. weatherford suspended its preferred-dividend payment in october 1985 and said it hasn't any plans to catch up on dividends in arrears about $6 million, but will do so some time in the future. additionally, the company said it filed with the securities and exchange commission for the proposed offering of 10 million shares of common stock, expected to be offered in november. the company said salomon brothers inc. and howard, weil, labouisse, friedrichs inc., underwriters for the offering, were granted an option to buy as much as an additional 1.5 million shares to cover over-allotments. proceeds will be used to eliminate and restructure bank debt. weatherford currently has approximately 11.1 million common shares outstanding.
earnings for most of the nation's major pharmaceutical makers are believed to have moved ahead briskly in the third quarter, as companies with newer, big-selling prescription drugs fared especially well. for the third consecutive quarter, however, most of the companies' revenues were battered by adverse foreign-currency translations as a result of the strong dollar abroad. analysts said that merck & co., eli lilly & co., warner-lambert co. and the squibb corp. unit of bristol-myers squibb co. all benefited from strong sales of relatively new, higher-priced medicines that provide wide profit margins. less robust earnings at pfizer inc. and upjohn co. were attributed to those companies' older products, many of which face stiffening competition from generic drugs and other medicines. joseph riccardo, an analyst with bear, stearns & co., said that over the past few years most drug makers have shed their slow-growing businesses and instituted other cost savings, such as consolidating manufacturing plants and administrative staffs. as a result, "major new products are having significant impact, even on a company with very large revenues," mr. riccardo said. analysts said profit for the dozen or so big drug makers, as a group, is estimated to have climbed between 11% and 14%. while that's not spectacular, neil sweig, an analyst with prudential bache, said that the rate of growth will "look especially good as compared to other companies if the economy turns downward." mr. sweig estimated that merck's profit for the quarter rose by about 22%, propelled by sales of its line-up of fast-growing prescription drugs, including its anti-cholesterol drug, mevacor; a high blood pressure medicine, vasotec; primaxin, an antibiotic, and pepcid, an anti-ulcer medication. profit climbed even though merck's sales were reduced by "one to three percentage points" as a result of the strong dollar, mr. sweig said. in the third quarter of 1988, merck earned $311.8 million, or 79 cents a share. in rahway, n.j., a merck spokesman said the company doesn't make earnings projections. mr. sweig said he estimated that lilly's earnings for the quarter jumped about 20%, largely because of the performance of its new anti-depressant prozac. the drug, introduced last year, is expected to generate sales of about $300 million this year. "it's turning out to be a real blockbuster," mr. sweig said. in last year's third quarter, lilly earned $171.4 million, or $1.20 a share. in indianapolis, lilly declined comment. several analysts said they expected warner-lambert's profit also to increase by more than 20% from $87.7 million, or $1.25 a share, it reported in the like period last year. the company is praised by analysts for sharply lowering its costs in recent years and shedding numerous companies with low profit margins. the company's lean operation, analysts said, allowed sharp-rising sales from its cholesterol drug, lopid, to power earnings growth. lopid sales are expected to be about $300 million this year, up from $190 million in 1988. in morris plains, n.j., a spokesman for the company said the analysts' projections are "in the ballpark." squibb's profit, estimated by analysts to be about 18% above the $123 million, or $1.25 a share, it earned in the third quarter of 1988, was the result of especially strong sales of its capoten drug for treating high blood pressure and other heart disease. the company was officially merged with bristol-myers co. earlier this month. bristol-myers declined to comment. mr. riccardo of bear stearns said that schering-plough corp. 's expected profit rise of about 18% to 20%, and bristol-meyers's expected profit increase of about 13% are largely because "those companies are really managed well." scheringplough earned $94.4 million, or 84 cents a share, while bristol-myers earned $232.3 million, or 81 cents a share, in the like period a year earlier. in madison, n.j., a spokesman for schering-plough said the company has "no problems" with the average estimate by a analysts that third-quarter earnings per share rose by about 19%, to $1. the company expects to achieve the 20% increase in full-year earnings per share, as it projected in the spring, the spokesman said. meanwhile, analysts said pfizer's recent string of lackluster quarterly performances continued, as earnings in the quarter were expected to decline by about 5%. sales of pfizer's important drugs, feldene for treating arthritis, and procardia, a heart medicine, have shrunk because of increased competition. "the (strong) dollar hurt pfizer a lot, too," mr. sweig said. in the third quarter last year, pfizer earned $216.8 million, or $1.29 a share. in new york, the company declined comment. analysts said they expected upjohn's profit to be flat or rise by only about 2% to 4% as compared with $89.6 million, or 49 cents a share, it earned a year ago. upjohn's biggest-selling drugs are xanax, a tranquilizer, and halcion, a sedative. sales of both drugs have been hurt by new state laws restricting the prescriptions of certain tranquilizing medicines and adverse publicity about the excessive use of the drugs. also, the company's hair-growing drug, rogaine, is selling well -- at about $125 million for the year, but the company's profit from the drug has been reduced by upjohn's expensive print and television campaigns for advertising, analysts said. in kalamazoo, mich., upjohn declined comment.
amid a crowd of crashing stocks, relational technology inc. 's stock fell particularly hard friday, dropping 23% because its problems were compounded by disclosure of an unexpected loss for its fiscal first quarter. the database software company said it expects a $2 million net loss for the fiscal first quarter ended sept. 30. it said analysts had been expecting a small profit for the period. revenue is expected to be "up modestly" from the $26.5 million reported a year ago. relational technology reported net income of $1.5 million, or 12 cents a share, in the year-earlier period. "while our international operations showed strong growth, our domestic business was substantially below expectations," said paul newton, president and chief executive officer. a spokesman said the company's first quarter is historically soft, and computer companies in general are experiencing slower sales. mr. newton said he accepted the resignation of thomas wilson, vice president of corporate sales, and that his marketing responsibilities have been reassigned. the company said mr. wilson's resignation wasn't related to the sales shortfall. relational technology went public in may 1988 at $14 a share. it fell $1.875 a share friday, to $6.25, a new low, in over-the-counter trading. its high for the past year was $16.375 a share. in the previous quarter, the company earned $4.5 million, or 37 cents a share, on sales of $47.2 million.
the bronx has a wonderful botanical garden, a great zoo, its own charming little italy (on arthur avenue) and, of course, the yankees. however, most people, having been subjected to news footage of the devastated south bronx, look at the borough the way tom wolfe's sherman mccoy did in "bonfire of the vanities" -- as a wrong turn into hell. but laura cunningham's bronx, her childhood bronx of the '50s, is something else altogether. in a lovely, novelistic memoir, "sleeping arrangements" (knopf, 195 pages, $18.95), she remembers an exotic playground, peopled mainly by jewish eccentrics and the occasional catholic (real oddballs like her sexpot friend, the hell-kitten diana, age five). ms. cunningham, a novelist and playwright, has a vivid and dramatically outsized sense of recall. she transforms her "bronx of the emotions, a place where the flats of mediocrity are only relieved by steep descents into hysteria" into the "babylonian bronx," a world simmering with sex and death and intrigue. in the babylonian bronx, jewish working-class people lived in drab, soviet-style buildings "glamorized" with names like anamor towers (after owners anna and morris snezak), whose lobbies and hallways were decorated with murals of ancient syrians and greeks, friezes of pompeii. for ms. cunningham the architectural discombobulation matched the discrepancy she felt living in the anamor towers as a little girl: " . . . outwardly ordinary, inwardly ornate, owing all inspiration to heathen cultures." sharp-witted and funny but never mean, she's a memorialist a bit like truman capote, if he'd been jewish and female and less bitchy. little lily, as ms. cunningham calls herself in the book, really wasn't ordinary. she was raised, for the first eight years, by her mother, rosie, whom she remembers as a loving liar, who realigned history to explain why lily's father didn't live with them. rosie reinvented this man, who may or may not have known about his child, as a war hero for lily's benefit. rosie died young and lily has remembered her as a romantic figure, who didn't interfere much with her child's education on the streets. the games bronx children played (holding kids down and stripping them, for example) seem tame by today's crack standards, but ms. cunningham makes it all sound like a great adventure. "without official knowledge of sex or death, we flirted with both," she writes. she analyzed families by their sleeping arrangements. her friend susan, whose parents kept reminding her she was unwanted, slept on a narrow bed wedged into her parents' bedroom, as though she were a temporary visitor. her friend diana's father was a professional thief; they didn't seem to have any bedrooms at all. maybe lily became so obsessed with where people slept and how because her own arrangements kept shifting. when rosie died, her uncles moved in -- and let her make the sleeping and other household arrangements. they painted the apartment orange, pink and white, according to her instructions. with loving detail she recalls her uncle gabe, an orthodox jew and song lyricist (who rhymed river with liver in a love song); and uncle len, a mysterious part-time investigator who looked like lincoln and carried a change of clothing in a manila envelope, like an "undercover president on a good-will mission." they came by their strangeness honestly. lily's grandmother, no cookie baker, excised the heads of disliked relatives from the family album, and lugged around her perennial work-in-progress, "philosophy for women." the book loses some momentum toward the end, when lily becomes more preoccupied with dating boys and less with her delightfully weird family. for the most part, though, there's much pleasure in her saucy, poignant probe into the mysteries of the babylonian bronx. the bronx also figures in bruce jay friedman's latest novel, which flashes back to the new york of the '50s. but both the past and present worlds of "the current climate" (atlantic monthly press, 200 pages, $18.95) feel cramped and static. for his sixth novel, mr. friedman tried to resuscitate the protagonist of his 1972 work, "about harry towns." harry is now a 57-year-old writer, whose continuing flirtation with drugs and marginal types in hollywood and new york seems quaintly out-of-synch. harry fondly remembers the "old" days of the early '70s, when people like his friend travis would take a psychiatrist on a date to analyze what travis was doing wrong. "an l.a. solution," explains mr. friedman. line by line mr. friedman's weary cynicism can be amusing, especially when he's riffing on the hollywood social scheme -- the way people size each other up, immediately canceling the desperate ones who merely almost made it. harry has avoided all that by living in a long island suburb with his wife, who's so addicted to soap operas and mystery novels she barely seems to notice when her husband disappears for drug-seeking forays into manhattan. but it doesn't take too many lines to figure harry out. he's a bore.
gulf resources & chemical corp. said it agreed to pay $1.5 million as part of an accord with the environmental protection agency regarding an environmental cleanup of a defunct smelter the company formerly operated in idaho. in 1984 the epa notified gulf resources, which was a part-owner of the smelter, that it was potentially liable for sharing cleanup costs at the site under the federal superfund program. the 21-square-mile area is contaminated with lead, zinc and other metals. gulf resources earlier this year proposed a reorganization plan that would make it a unit of a bermuda concern, potentially exempting it from liability for the smelter's cleanup costs. the company said that as part of its agreement with the epa, it "made certain voluntary undertakings with respect to intercorporate transactions entered into after the reorganization." the company, which issued a statement on the agreement late friday, said that $1 million of the payment was previously provided for in its financial statements and that $500,000 will be recognized in its 1989 third-quarter statement. the agreement and consent decree are subject to court approval, the company said. gulf resources added that it "will seek to recover equitable contribution from others for both the amount of the settlement and any other liabilities it may incur under the superfund law." under the agreement, gulf must give the u.s. government 45 days' advance written notice before issuing any dividends on common stock. the company's net worth cannot fall below $185 million after the dividends are issued. "the terms of that agreement only become effective the date of gulf's reorganization, which we anticipate will occur sometime in early 1990," said lawrence r. mehl, gulf's general counsel. in addition, gulf must give the government 20 days' advance written notice of any loans exceeding $50 million that are made to the bermuda-based holding company. gulf's net worth after those transaction must be at least $150 million. separately, the company said it expects to hold a special meeting for shareholders in early 1990 to vote on its proposed reorganization.
many of the nation's highest-ranking executives saluted friday's market plunge as an overdue comeuppance for speculators and takeover players. assuming that the market doesn't head into a bottomless free fall, some executives think friday's action could prove a harbinger of good news -- as a sign that the leveraged buy-out and takeover frenzy of recent years may be abating. "this is a reaction to artificial lbo valuations, rather than to any fundamentals," said john young, chairman of hewlett-packard co., whose shares dropped $3.125 to $48.125. "if we get rid of a lot of that nonsense, it will be a big plus." a few of the executives here for the fall meeting of the business council, a group that meets to discuss national issues, were only too happy to personalize their criticism. "people wish the government would do something about leveraged buy-outs, do something about takeovers, do something about donald trump," said rand araskog, chairman of itt corp., whose stock dropped $3.375. "where's the leadership? where's the guy who can say: `enough is enough'"? the executives were remarkably unperturbed by the plunge even though it lopped billions of dollars off the value of their companies -- and millions off their personal fortunes. "i'm not going to worry about one day's decline," said kenneth olsen, digital equipment corp. president, who was leisurely strolling through the bright orange and yellow leaves of the mountains here after his company's shares plunged $5.75 to close at $86.50. "i didn't bother calling anybody; i didn't even turn on tv." "there hasn't been any fundamental change in the economy," added john smale, whose procter & gamble co. took an $8.75 slide to close at $120.75. "the fact that this happened two years ago and there was a recovery gives people some comfort that this won't be a problem." of course, established corporate managements often tend to applaud the setbacks of stock speculators and takeover artists. indeed, one chief executive who was downright delighted by friday's events was robert crandall, chairman of amr corp., the parent of american airlines and the target of a takeover offer by mr. trump. asked whether friday's action could help him avoid being trumped by the new york real estate magnate, mr. crandall smiled broadly and said: "no comment." on friday morning, before the market's sell-off, the business leaders issued a report predicting the economy would grow at roughly an inflation-adjusted 2% annual rate, through next year, then accelerate anew in 1991. of the 19 economists who worked on the business council forecast, only two projected periods of decline in the nation's output over the next two years, and in "both instances the declines are too modest to warrant the phrase recession," said lewis preston, chairman of j.p. morgan & co. and vice chairman of the business council.
the real estate slump that's pushing down the price of new york office space and housing is also affecting the city's retail real estate market. in manhattan, once-desirable store sites sit vacant and newly constructed space has been slow to fill. retail real estate brokers say tenants are reluctant to sign leases because of uncertainty about the local economy, turmoil in their own industries and a belief that rents have not yet hit bottom. "there is an unbelievable amount of space available," says faith consolo, senior vice president at garrick-aug associates store leasing inc. there are about 2,000 stores for rent, up from a more typical range of 1,200 to 1,500. "this further confuses retailers," she says. "they wonder should they sign a lease if prices are still coming down? is this the wrong time to open a store? who is going to be in the space next door?" in addition, ms. consolo says, tenants usually can negotiate to pay rents that are about one-quarter lower than landlords' initial asking price. a handful of hot retail locations, such as the 57th street and madison and fifth avenue areas, have been able to sustain what many see as astronomical rents. and, in some neighborhoods, rents have merely hit a plateau. but on average, manhattan retail rents have dropped 10% to 15% in the past six months alone, experts say. that follows a more subtle decline in the prior six months, after manhattan rents had run up rapidly since 1986. the same factors limiting demand for office space have affected retailing. "as businesses contract or depart, the number of employees who might use retail services shrinks," says edward a. friedman, senior vice president of helmsley spear inc. he says financial problems plaguing electronics, fur and furniture companies -- key categories in the local retail economy -- have further deflated the market. hardest hit are what he calls "secondary" sites that primarily serve neighborhood residents. in these locations, mr. friedman says, "retailers are increasingly cautious about expanding and rents have remained steady or in some cases have declined." weakness in the restaurant industry, which is leaving retail space vacant, exacerbates the problem for landlords. it is also no comfort to landlords and small new york retailers when the future of larger department stores, which anchor retail neighborhoods, are in doubt. hooker corp., parent of bonwit teller and b. altman's, is mired in bankruptcy proceedings and bloomingdale's is for sale by its owner, campeau corp. the trend toward lower rents may seem surprising given that some communities in new york are bemoaning the loss of favorite local businesses to high rents. but, despite the recent softening, for many of these retailers there's still been too big a jump from the rental rates of the late 1970s, when their leases were signed. certainly, the recent drop in prices doesn't mean manhattan comes cheap. new york retail rents still run well above the going rate in other u.s. cities. madison and fifth avenues and east 57th street can command rents of up to $500 a square foot, and $250 is not uncommon. the thriving 34th street area offers rents of about $100 a square foot, as do up-and-coming locations along lower fifth avenue. by contrast, rentals in the best retail locations in boston, san francisco and chicago rarely top $100 a square foot. and rents on beverly hills' rodeo drive generally don't exceed about $125 a square foot. the new york stock exchange said two securities will begin trading this week. precision castparts corp., portland, ore., will begin trading with the symbol pcp. it makes investment castings and has traded over-the-counter. royal bank of scotland group plc, an edinburgh, scotland, financial services company, will list american depositary shares, representing preferred shares, with the symbol rbspr. it will continue to trade on the international stock exchange, london. the american stock exchange listed shares of two companies. aim telephones inc., a parsippany, n.j., telecommunications equipment supply company, started trading with the symbol aim. it had traded over-the-counter. columbia laboratories inc., miami, began trading with the symbol cob. the pharmaceuticals maker had traded over-the-counter. the national market system of the nasdaq over-the-counter market listed shares of one company. employee benefit plans inc., a minneapolis health-care services company, was listed with the symbol ebpi.
when justice william brennan marks the start of his 34th year on the supreme court today, the occasion will differ sharply from previous anniversaries of his tenure. for the first time, the 83-year-old justice finds his influence almost exclusively in dissent, rather than as a force in the high court's majority. this role reversal holds true, as well, for his three liberal and moderate allies, justices thurgood marshall, harry blackmun and john stevens. but are these four players, three of them in their 80s, ready to assume a different role after 88 years, collectively, of service on the high court? every indication is that the four are prepared to accept this new role, and the frustrations that go with it, but in different ways. justices brennan and stevens appear philosophical about it; justices marshall and blackmun appear fighting mad. the four justices are no newcomers to dissent, often joining forces in the past decade to criticize the court's conservative drift. but always, in years past, they have bucked the trend and have been able to pick up a fifth vote to eke out a number of major victories in civil rights and liberties cases. now, however, as the court's new five-member conservative majority continues to solidify, victories for the liberals are rare. the change is most dramatic for justice brennan, the last survivor of the mid-1960s liberal majority under chief justice earl warren. in the seven supreme court terms from the fall of 1962 through the spring of 1967, the height of the warren court's power, justice brennan cast only 25 dissenting votes in 555 cases decided by the court. last term alone he cast 52 dissenting votes in 133 decisions, with the contentious flag-burning ruling as his only big victory. but justice brennan foresaw his new role, strongly defending the importance of dissents in a 1985 speech. "each time the court revisits an issue, the justices will be forced by a dissent to reconsider the fundamental questions and to rethink the result," he said. moreover, in recent months he has said that when he was on the winning side in the 1960s, he knew that the tables might turn in the future. he has said that he now knows how justice john harlan felt, a reference to the late conservative justice who was the most frequent dissenter from the warren court's opinions. associates of 81-year-old justice marshall say he was "depressed" about the court's direction last spring, but is feisty about his role and determined to speak out against the court's cutbacks in civil rights. "we could sweep it under the rug and hide it, but i'm not going to do it," he said in a speech last month. he, like justice brennan, considers dissents highly important for the future, a point that hasn't escaped legal scholars. harvard law school professor laurence tribe says there is a "generation-skipping" flavor to current dissents. the dissenters in the warren court, he says, appeared to be writing for the short-term, suggesting that the court's direction might change soon. "brennan and marshall are speaking in their dissents to a more distant future," he says. justice blackmun, who will turn 81 next month, also seems feisty about his new role. associates say he takes some defeats more personally than his colleagues, especially attempts to curtail the right to abortion first recognized in his 1973 opinion, roe vs. wade. friends and associates who saw justice blackmun during the summer said he was no more discouraged about the court than in recent years. and his outlook improved after successful cataract surgery in august. but his level of frustration showed in a recent, impassioned speech to a group of hundreds of lawyers in chicago. he concluded his remarks by quoting, emotionally and at some length, according to those present, the late martin luther king's famous "i have a dream" speech from the 1963 march on washington. justice stevens, 69, is probably the most philosophical of the dissenters about his role, in part because he may be the least liberal of the four, but also because he enjoys the intellectual challenge of arguing with the majority more than the others. if the role these four dissenters are assuming is a familiar one in modern supreme court history, it also differs in an important way from recent history, court watchers say. "the dissenters of the warren court were often defending a legal legacy that they inherited," says prof. a.e. dick howard of the university of virginia law school, "but the dissenters today are defending a legacy that they created."
the government sold the deposits of four savings-and-loan institutions, in its first wave of sales of big, sick thrifts, but low bids prevented the sale of a fifth. the four s&ls were sold to large banks, as was the case with most of the 28 previous transactions initiated by the resolution trust corp. since it was created in the s&l bailout legislation two months ago. two of the four big thrifts were sold to ncnb corp., charlotte, n.c., which has aggressively expanded its markets, particularly in texas and florida. a canadian bank bought another thrift, in the first rtc transaction with a foreign bank. under these deals, the rtc sells just the deposits and the healthy assets. these "clean-bank" transactions leave the bulk of bad assets, mostly real estate, with the government, to be sold later. in these four, for instance, the rtc is stuck with $4.51 billion in bad assets. acquirers paid premiums ranging from 1.5% to 3.7% for the deposits and branch systems, roughly in line with what analysts were expecting. the buyers will also be locked into deposit rates for just two weeks, as has been the case with previous deals. after that, the buyers may repudiate the rates paid by the former thrifts. but it's uncertain whether these institutions will take those steps. ncnb, for example, has been one of the highest rate payers in the texas market, and in florida, rates are especially sensitive in retirement communities. the rtc had previously targeted five thrifts for quick sales in order to spend cash by certain budgetary deadlines, but the delays illustrate the tough chore facing the agency. "these thrifts are beached whales," said bert ely, an industry consultant based in alexandria, va. for example, the delay in selling people's heritage savings, salina, kan., with $1.7 billion in assets, has forced the rtc to consider selling off the thrift branch-by-branch, instead of as a whole institution. ncnb continued its foray into the florida and texas markets. ncnb will acquire university federal savings association, houston, which had assets of $2.8 billion. ncnb texas national bank will pay the rtc a premium of $129 million for $3.5 billion in deposits. as a measure of the depths to which the texas real estate market has sunk, the rtc will pay $3.8 billion to ncnb to take $750 million of bad assets. ncnb also acquired freedom savings & loan association, tampa, fla., which had total assets of $900 million. ncnb will pay the rtc a premium of $40.4 million for $1.1 billion in deposits. ncnb will also acquire $266 million of freedom's assets from the rtc, which will require $875 million in assistance. meridian bancorp inc., reading, pa., will acquire hill financial savings association, red hill, pa., which had $2.3 billion in assets. meridian will pay a premium of $30.5 million to assume $2 billion in deposits. it will also purchase $845 million of the thrift's assets, with $1.9 billion in rtc assistance. in the first rtc transaction with a foreign buyer, royal trustco ltd., toronto, will acquire pacific savings bank, costa mesa, calif., which had $949 million in assets. royal trustco will pay the rtc $25 million to assume $989 million in deposits. it will also purchase $473 million in assets, and receive $550 million in assistance from the rtc.
the following issues were recently filed with the securities and exchange commission: american cyanamid co., offering of 1,250,000 common shares, via merrill lynch capital markets. limited inc., offering of up to $300 million of debt securities and warrants. nuveen california performance plus municipal fund inc., initial offering of five million common shares, via alex. brown & sons inc., john nuveen & co., prudential-bache capital funding, and bateman eichler, hill richards. pacificare health systems inc., proposed offering of 1.5 million common shares, of which 700,000 shares will be offered by pacificare and 800,000 shares by unihealth america inc. (pacificare's 71%), via dillon, read & co. inc., goldman, sachs & co. and dean witter reynolds inc. pricor inc., offering of one million new shares of common stock and 300,000 shares by holders, via drexel burnham lambert inc. and j.c. bradford & co. trans world airlines inc., offering of $150 million senior notes, via drexel burnham.
time magazine, in a move to reduce the costs of wooing new subscribers, is lowering its circulation guarantee to advertisers for the second consecutive year, increasing its subscription rates and cutting back on merchandise giveaways. in an announcement to its staff last week, executives at time warner inc. 's weekly magazine said time will "dramatically de-emphasize" its use of electronic giveaways such as telephones in television subscription drives; cut the circulation it guarantees advertisers by 300,000, to four million; and increase the cost of its annual subscription rate by about $4 to $55. in a related development, the news-weekly, for the fourth year in a row, said it won't increase its advertising rates in 1990; a full, four-color page in the magazine costs about $120,000. however, because the guaranteed circulation base is being lowered, ad rates will be effectively 7.5% higher per subscriber, according to richard heinemann, time associate publisher. time is following the course of some other mass-circulation magazines that in recent years have challenged the publishing myth that maintaining artificially high, and expensive, circulations is the way to draw advertisers. in recent years, reader's digest, new york times co. 's mccall's, and most recently news corp. 's tv guide, have cut their massive circulation rate bases to eliminate marginal circulation and hold down rates for advertisers. deep discounts in subscriptions and offers of free clock radios and watches have become accepted forms of attracting new subscribers in the hyper-competitive world of magazine news-weeklies. but time, as part of the more cost-conscious time warner, wants to wean itself away from expensive gimmicks. besides, time executives think selling a news magazine with a clock radio is tacky. "giveaways just give people the wrong image," said mr. heinemann. "that perception takes the focus off the magazine." time magazine executives predictably paint the circulation cut as a show of strength and actually a benefit to advertisers. "what we are doing is screening out the readers who are only casually related to the magazine and don't really read it," said mr. heinemann. "we are trying to create quality and involvement." however, time executives used the same explanation when in october 1988 the magazine cut its guaranteed circulation from 4.6 million to 4.3 million. and time's paid circulation, according to audit bureau of circulations, dropped 7.3% to 4,393,237 in the six months ended june 30, 1989. still, time's move is being received well, once again. "it's terrific for advertisers to know the reader will be paying more," said michael drexler, national media director at bozell inc. ad agency. "a few drops in circulation are of no consequence. it's not a show of weakness; they are improving the quality of circulation while insuring their profits." mr. heinemann said the changes represent a new focus in the magazine industry: a magazine's net revenue per subscriber, or the actual revenue from subscribers after discounts and the cost of premiums have been stripped away. "the question is how much are we getting from each reader," said mr. heinemann. time's rivals news-weeklies, washington post co. 's newsweek and u.s. news & world report, are less reliant on electronic giveaways, and in recent years both have been increasing their circulation rate bases. both magazines are expected to announce their ad rates and circulation levels for 1990 within a month.
the second u.s. circuit court of appeals opinion in the arcadian phosphate case did not repudiate the position pennzoil co. took in its dispute with texaco, contrary to your sept. 8 article "court backs texaco's view in pennzoil case -- too late." the fundamental rule of contract law applied to both cases was that courts will not enforce agreements to which the parties did not intend to be bound. in the pennzoil/texaco litigation, the courts found pennzoil and getty oil intended to be bound; in arcadian phosphates they found there was no intention to be bound. admittedly, the principle in the cases is the same. but the outcome of a legal dispute almost always turns on the facts. and the facts, as found by the various courts in these two lawsuits, were different. when you suggest otherwise, you leave the realm of reporting and enter the orbit of speculation. charles f. vihon boston
valley federal savings & loan association said imperial corp. of america withdrew from regulators its application to buy five valley federal branches, leaving the transaction in limbo. the broken purchase appears as additional evidence of trouble at imperial corp., whose spokesman said the company withdrew its application from the federal office of thrift supervision because of an informal notice that imperial's thrift unit failed to meet community reinvestment act requirements. the community reinvestment act requires savings and loan associations to lend money in amounts related to areas where deposits are received. the transaction, announced in august, included about $146 million in deposits at the five outlets in california's san joaquin valley. terms weren't disclosed, but valley federal had said it expected to post a modest pretax gain and to save about $2 million in operating costs annually. valley federal said friday that it is considering whether to seek another buyer for the branches or to pursue the transaction with imperial corp., which said it is attempting to meet community reinvestment act requirements. valley federal, with assets of $3.3 billion, is based in van nuys. imperial corp., based in san diego, is the parent of imperial savings & loan. in the first six months of the year it posted a net loss of $33.1 million.
south africa freed the anc's sisulu and seven other political prisoners. thousands of supporters, many brandishing flags of the outlawed african national congress, gave the anti-apartheid activists a tumultuous reception upon their return to black townships across the country. most of those freed had spent at least 25 years in prison. the 77-year-old sisulu, sentenced to life in 1964 along with black nationalist nelson mandela for plotting to overthrow the government, said equality for blacks in south africa was in reach. the releases, announced last week by president de klerk, were viewed as pretoria's tacit legalization of the anc. mandela, considered the most prominent leader of the anc, remains in prison. but his release within the next few months is widely expected. the soviet union reported that thousands of tons of goods needed to ease widespread shortages across the nation were piled up at ports and rail depots, and food shipments were rotting because of a lack of people and equipment to move the cargo. strikes and mismanagement were cited, and premier ryzhkov warned of "tough measures." bush indicated there might be "room for flexibility" in a bill to allow federal funding of abortions for poor women who are vicitims of rape and incest. he reiterated his opposition to such funding, but expressed hope of a compromise. the president, at a news conference friday, also renewed a call for the ouster of panama's noriega. the white house said minors haven't any right to abortion without the consent of their parents. the administration's policy was stated in a friend-of-the-court brief urging the supreme court to give states more leeway to restrict abortions. ten of the nation's governors, meanwhile, called on the justices to reject efforts to limit abortions. the justice department announced that the fbi has been given the authority to seize u.s. fugitives overseas without the permission of foreign governments. secretary of state baker emphasized friday that the new policy wouldn't be invoked by the bush administration without full consideration of foreign-policy implications. nasa pronounced the space shuttle atlantis ready for launch tomorrow following a five-day postponement of the flight because of a faulty engine computer. the device was replaced. the spacecraft's five astronauts are to dispatch the galileo space probe on an exploration mission to jupiter. south korea's president roh traveled to the u.s. for a five-day visit that is expected to focus on ties between washington and seoul. roh, who is facing calls for the reduction of u.s. military forces in south korea, is to meet with bush tomorrow and is to address a joint session of congress on wednesday. china's communist leadership voted to purge the party of "hostile and anti-party elements" and wealthy private businessmen, whom they called exploiters. the decision, reported by the official xinhua news agency, indicated that the crackdown prompted by student-led pro-democracy protests in june is intensifying. hundreds of east germans flocked to bonn's embassy in warsaw, bringing to more than 1,200 the number of emigres expected to flee to the west beginning today. more than 2,100 others escaped to west germany through hungary over the weekend. in leipzig, activists vowed to continue street protests to demand internal change. zaire's president mobutu met in southern france with angolan rebel leader savimbi and a senior u.s. envoy in a bid to revive an accord to end angola's civil war. details of the talks, described by a zairean official as "very delicate," weren't disclosed. plo leader arafat insisted on guarantees that any elections in the israeli-occupied territories would be impartial. he made his remarks to a plo gathering in baghdad. in the occupied lands, underground leaders of the arab uprising rejected a u.s. plan to arrange israeli-palestinian talks as shamir opposed holding such discussions in cairo. lebanese christian lawmakers presented to arab mediators at talks in saudi arabia proposals for a new timetable for the withdrawal of syria's forces from lebanon. a plan currently under study gives damascus two years to pull back to eastern lebanon, starting from the time beirut's legislature increases political power for moslems. hurricane jerry threatened to combine with the highest tides of the year to swamp the texas-louisiana coast. thousands of residents of low-lying areas were ordered to evacuate as the storm headed north in the gulf of mexico with 80 mph winds.
a group of arby's franchisees said they formed an association to oppose miami beach financier victor posner's control of the restaurant chain. the decision is the latest move in an escalating battle between the franchisees and mr. posner that began in august. at the time, a group called r.b. partners ltd., consisting of eight of arby's largest franchisees, offered more than $200 million to buy arby's inc., which is part of dwg corp. dwg is a holding company controlled by mr. posner. one week later, leonard h. roberts, president and chief executive officer of arby's, was fired in a dispute with mr. posner. friday, 42 franchisees announced the formation of an association -- called a.p. association inc. -- to "preserve the integrity of the arby's system." the franchisees, owners or operators of 1,000 of the 1,900 franchised arby's in the u.s., said: "we have concluded that continued control of arby's by victor posner is totally unacceptable to us, because it is extremely likely to cause irreparable damage to the arby's system. we support all efforts to remove victor posner from control of arby's inc. and the arby's system." the group said it would consider, among other things, withholding royalty payments and initiating a class-action lawsuit seeking court approval for the withholdings. in florida, renee mottram, a senior vice president at dwg, responded: "we don't think any individual or group should disrupt a winning system or illegally interfere with existing contractual relationships for their own self-serving motives."
september's steep rise in producer prices shows that inflation still persists, and the pessimism over interest rates caused by the new price data contributed to the stock market's plunge friday. after falling for three consecutive months, the producer price index for finished goods shot up 0.9% last month, the labor department reported friday, as energy prices jumped after tumbling through the summer. although the report, which was released before the stock market opened, didn't trigger the 190.58-point drop in the dow jones industrial average, analysts said it did play a role in the market's decline. analysts immediately viewed the price data, the grimmest inflation news in months, as evidence that the federal reserve was unlikely to allow interest rates to fall as many investors had hoped. further fueling the belief that pressures in the economy were sufficient to keep the fed from easing credit, the commerce department reported friday that retail sales grew 0.5% in september, to $145.21 billion. that rise came on top of a 0.7% gain in august, and suggested there is still healthy consumer demand in the economy. "i think the friday report, combined with the actions of the fed, weakened the belief that there was going to be an imminent easing of monetary policy," said robert dederick, chief economist at northern trust co. in chicago. but economists were divided over the extent of the inflation threat signaled by the new numbers. "the overall 0.9% increase is serious in itself, but what is even worse is that excluding food and energy, the producer price index still increased by 0.7%," said gordon richards, an economist at the national association of manufacturers. but sung won sohn, chief economist at norwest corp. in minneapolis, blamed rising energy prices and the annual autumn increase in car prices for most of the september jump. "i would say this is not bad news; this is a blip," he said. "the core rate is not really out of line." all year, energy prices have skewed the producer price index, which measures changes in the prices producers receive for goods. inflation unquestionably has fallen back from its torrid pace last winter, when a steep run-up in world oil prices sent the index surging at double-digit annual rates. energy prices then plummeted through the summer, causing the index to decline for three consecutive months. overall, the index has climbed at a 5.1% compound annual rate since the start of the year, the labor department said. while far more restrained than the pace at the beginning of the year, that is still a steeper rise than the 4.0% increase for all of 1988. moreover, this year's good inflation news may have ended last month, when energy prices zoomed up 6.5% after plunging 7.3% in august. some analysts expect oil prices to remain relatively stable in the months ahead, leaving the future pace of inflation uncertain. analysts had expected that the climb in oil prices last month would lead to a substantial rise in the producer price index, but the 0.9% climb was higher than most anticipated. "i think the resurgence {in inflation} is going to continue for a few months," said john mueller, chief economist at bell mueller cannon, a washington economic forecasting firm. he predicted that inflation will moderate next year, saying that credit conditions are fairly tight world-wide. but dirk van dongen, president of the national association of wholesaler-distributors, said that last month's rise "isn't as bad an omen" as the 0.9% figure suggests. "if you examine the data carefully, the increase is concentrated in energy and motor vehicle prices, rather than being a broad-based advance in the prices of consumer and industrial goods," he explained. passenger car prices jumped 3.8% in september, after climbing 0.5% in august and declining in the late spring and summer. many analysts said the september increase was a one-time event, coming as dealers introduced their 1990 models. although all the price data were adjusted for normal seasonal fluctuations, car prices rose beyond the customary autumn increase. prices for capital equipment rose a hefty 1.1% in september, while prices for home electronic equipment fell 1.1%. food prices declined 0.6%, after climbing 0.3% in august. meanwhile, the retail sales report showed that car sales rose 0.8% in september to $32.82 billion. but at least part of the increase could have come from higher prices, analysts said. sales at general merchandise stores rose 1.7% after declining 0.6% in august, while sales of building materials fell 1.8% after rising 1.7%. producer prices for intermediate goods grew 0.4% in september, after dropping for three consecutive months. prices for crude goods, an array of raw materials, jumped 1.1% after declining 1.9% in august and edging up 0.2% in july. here are the labor department's producer price indexes (1982=100) for september, before seasonal adjustment, and the percentage changes from september, 1988.
cityfed financial corp. said it expects to report a loss of at least $125 million to $150 million for the third quarter. in the year-earlier period, cityfed had net income of $485,000, but no per-share earnings. cityfed's president and chief executive officer, john atherton, said the loss stems from several factors. he said nonperforming assets rose to slightly more than $700 million from $516 million between june and september. approximately 85% of the total consisted of nonperforming commercial real estate assets. accordingly, cityfed estimated that it will provide between $85 million and $110 million for credit losses in the third quarter. cityfed added that significant additional loan-loss provisions may be required by federal regulators as part of the current annual examination of city federal savings bank, cityfed's primary subsidiary, based in somerset, n.j. city federal operates 105 banking offices in new jersey and florida. mr. atherton said cityfed will also mark its portfolio of high-yield corporate bonds to market as a result of federal legislation requiring that savings institutions divest themselves of such bonds. that action, cityfed said, will result in a charge against third-quarter results of approximately $30 million. cityfed also said it expects to shed its remaining mortgage loan origination operations outside its principal markets in new jersey and florida and, as a result, is taking a charge for discontinued operations. all these actions, mr. atherton said, will result in a loss of $125 million to $150 million for the third quarter. he added, however: "depending on the resolution of certain accounting issues relating to mortgages servicing and the outcome of the annual examination of city federal currently in progress with respect to the appropriate level of loan loss reserves, the total loss for the quarter could significantly exceed this range."
centrust savings bank said federal thrift regulators ordered it to suspend dividend payments on its two classes of preferred stock, indicating that regulators' concerns about the troubled institution have heightened. in a statement, miami-based centrust said the regulators cited the thrift's operating losses and "apparent losses" in its junk-bond portfolio in ordering the suspension of the dividends. regulators also ordered centrust to stop buying back the preferred stock. david l. paul, chairman and chief executive officer, criticized the federal office of thrift supervision, which issued the directive, saying it was "inappropriate" and based on "insufficient" reasons. he said the thrift will try to get regulators to reverse the decision. the suspension of a preferred stock dividend is a serious step that signals that regulators have deep concerns about an institution's health. in march, regulators labeled centrust a "troubled institution," largely because of its big junk-bond holdings and its operating losses. in the same month, the office of thrift supervision ordered the institution to stop paying common stock dividends until its operations were on track. for the nine months ended june 30, centrust had a net loss of $21.3 million, compared with year-earlier net income of $52.8 million. centrust, which is florida's largest thrift, holds one of the largest junk-bond portfolios of any thrift in the nation. since april, it has pared its high-yield bond holdings to about $890 million from $1.35 billion. mr. paul said only about $150 million of the current holdings are tradeable securities registered with the securities and exchange commission. the remainder, he said, are commercial loan participations, or private placements, that aren't filed with the sec and don't have a ready market. centrust and regulators have been in a dispute over market valuations for the junk bonds. the office of thrift supervision has been hounding centrust to provide current market values for its holdings, but centrust has said it can't easily obtain such values because of the relative illiquidity of the bonds and lack of a ready market. regulators have become increasingly antsy about centrust's and other thrifts' junk-bond holdings in light of the recent federal thrift bailout legislation and the recent deep decline in the junk-bond market. the legislation requires thrifts to divest themselves of junk bonds in the new, somber regulatory climate. in american stock exchange composite trading friday, centrust common shares closed at $3, down 12.5 cents. in a statement friday, mr. paul challenged the regulators' decision, saying the thrift's operating losses and "apparent" junk-bond losses "have been substantially offset by gains in other activities of the bank." he also said substantial reserves have been set aside for possible losses from the junk bonds. in the third quarter, for instance, centrust added $22.5 million to its general reserves. mr. paul said the regulators should instead move ahead with approving centrust's request to sell 63 of its 71 branches to great western bank, a unit of great western financial corp. based in beverly hills, calif. the branch sale is the centerpiece of centrust's strategy to transform itself into a traditional s&l from a high-flying institution that relied heavily on securities trading for profits, according to mr. paul. most analysts and thrift executives had expected a decision on the proposed transaction, which was announced in july, long before now. many interpret the delay as an indication that regulators are skeptical about the proposal. branches and deposits can be sold at a premium in the event federal regulators take over an institution. centrust, however, touts the branch sale, saying it would bring in $150 million and reduce the thrift's assets to $6.7 billion from $9 billion. it said the sale would give it positive tangible capital of $82 million, or about 1.2% of assets, from a negative $33 million as of sept. 30, thus bringing centrust close to regulatory standards. centrust said the branch sale would also reduce the company's large amount of good will by about $180 million. critics, however, say the branch sale will make centrust more dependent than ever on brokered deposits and junk bonds. mr. paul counters that he intends to further pare the size of centrust by not renewing more than $1 billion of brokered certificates of deposit when they come due. the thrift is also working to unload its junk-bond portfolio by continuing to sell off the bonds, and it plans to eventually place some of them in a separate affiliate, as required under the new thrift law.
british aerospace plc and france's thomson-csf s.a. said they are nearing an agreement to merge their guided-missile divisions, greatly expanding collaboration between the two defense contractors. the 50-50 joint venture, which may be dubbed eurodynamics, would have combined annual sales of at least #1.4 billion ($2.17 billion) and would be among the world's largest missile makers. after two years of talks, plans for the venture are sufficiently advanced for the companies to seek french and british government clearance. the companies hope for a final agreement by year-end. the venture would strengthen the rapidly growing ties between the two companies, and help make them a leading force in european defense contracting. in recent months, a string of cross-border mergers and joint ventures have reshaped the once-balkanized world of european arms manufacture. already, british aerospace and french government-controlled thomson-csf collaborate on a british missile contract and on an air-traffic control radar system. just last week they announced they may make a joint bid to buy ferranti international signal plc, a smaller british defense contractor rocked by alleged accounting fraud at a u.s. unit. the sudden romance of british aerospace and thomson-csf -- traditionally bitter competitors for middle east and third world weapons contracts -- is stirring controversy in western europe's defense industry. most threatened by closer british aerospace-thomson ties would be their respective national rivals, including matra s.a. in france and britain's general electric co. plc. but neither matra nor gec -- unrelated to stamford, conn.-based general electric co. -- are sitting quietly by as their competitors join forces. yesterday, a source close to gec confirmed that his company may join the ferranti fight, as part of a possible consortium that would bid against british aerospace and thomson-csf. companies with which gec has had talks about a possible joint ferranti bid include matra, britain's dowty group plc, west germany's daimler-benz ag, and france's dassault group. but it may be weeks before gec and its potential partners decide whether to bid, the source indicated. gec plans first to study ferranti's financial accounts, which auditors recently said included #215 million in fictitious contracts at a u.s. unit, international signal & control group, with which ferranti merged last year. also, any gec bid might be blocked by british antitrust regulators; ferranti is gec's main competitor on several key defense-electronics contracts, and its purchase by gec may heighten british defense ministry worries about concentration in the country's defense industry. a consortium bid, however, would diminish gec's direct role in ferranti and might consequently appease ministry officials. a british aerospace spokeswoman appeared unperturbed by the prospect of a fight with gec for ferranti: "competition is the name of the game," she said. at least one potential gec partner, matra, insists it isn't interested in ferranti. "we have nothing to say about this affair, which doesn't concern us," a matra official said sunday. the missile venture, the british aerospace spokeswoman said, is a needed response to the "new environment" in defense contracting. for both thomson and british aerospace, earnings in their home markets have come under pressure from increasingly tight-fisted defense ministries; and middle east sales, a traditional mainstay for both companies' exports, have been hurt by five years of weak oil prices. the venture's importance for thomson is great. thomson feels the future of its defense business depends on building cooperation with other europeans. the european defense industry is consolidating; for instance, west germany's siemens ag recently joined gec in a takeover of britain's plessey co., and daimler-benz agreed to buy messerschmitt-boelkow blohm g.m.b. h. in missiles, thomson is already overshadowed by british aerospace and by its home rival, france's aerospatiale s.a.; to better compete, thomson officials say, they need a partnership. to justify 50-50 ownership of the planned venture, thomson would make a cash payment to british aerospace. annual revenue of british aerospace's missile business is about #950 million, a thomson spokesman said. british aerospace's chief missile products include its 17-year-old family of rapier surface-to-air missiles. thomson missile products, with about half british aerospace's annual revenue, include the crotale surface-to-air missile family.
interprovincial pipe line co. said it will delay a proposed two-step, 830 million canadian-dollar (us$705.6 million) expansion of its system because canada's output of crude oil is shrinking. interprovincial, canada's biggest oil pipeline operator and a major transporter of crude to the u.s., said revised industry forecasts indicate that canadian oil output will total about 1.64 million barrels a day by 1991, 8% lower than a previous estimate. canadian crude production averaged about 1.69 million barrels a day during 1989's first half, about 1% below the 1988 level. "the capability of existing fields to deliver oil is dropping," and oil exploration activity is also down dramatically, as many producers shift their emphasis to natural gas, said ronald watkins, vice president for government and industry relations with interprovincial's parent, interhome energy inc. mr. watkins said volume on interprovincial's system is down about 2% since january and is expected to fall further, making expansion unnecessary until perhaps the mid-1990s. "there has been a swing of the pendulum back to the gas side," he said. many of canada's oil and gas producers say the outlook for natural gas is better than it is for oil, and have shifted their exploration and development budgets accordingly. the number of active drilling rigs in canada is down 30% from a year ago, and the number of completed oil wells is "down more than that, due to the increasing focus on gas exploration," said robert feick, manager of crude oil with calgary's independent petroleum association of canada, an industry group. mr. watkins said the main reason for the production decline is shrinking output of light crude from mature, conventional fields in western canada. interprovincial transports about 75% of all crude produced in western canada, and almost 60% of interprovincial's total volume consists of light crude. nearly all of the crude oil that canada exports to the u.s. is transported on interprovincial's system, whose main line runs from edmonton to major u.s. and canadian cities in the great lakes region, including chicago, buffalo, toronto and montreal. canada's current oil exports to the u.s. total about 600,000 barrels a day, or about 9.1% of net u.s. crude imports, said john lichtblau, president of the new york-based petroleum industry research foundation. that ranks canada as the fourth-largest source of imported crude, behind saudi arabia, nigeria and mexico. mr. lichtblau said canada's declining crude output, combined with the fast-shrinking output of u.s. crude, will help intensify u.s. reliance on oil from overseas, particularly the middle east. "it's very much a growing concern. but when something is inevitable, you learn to live with it," he said. mr. lichtblau stressed that the delay of interprovincial's proposed expansion won't by itself increase u.s. dependence on offshore crude, however, since canadian imports are limited in any case by canada's falling output. under terms of its proposed two-step expansion, which would have required regulatory approval, interprovincial intended to add 200,000 barrels a day of additional capacity to its system, beginning with a modest expansion by 1991. the system currently has a capacity of 1.55 million barrels a day.
inland steel industries inc. expects to report that third-quarter earnings dropped more than 50% from the previous quarter as a result of reduced sales volume and increased costs. in the second quarter, the steelmaker had net income of $45.3 million or $1.25 a share, including a pretax charge of $17 million related to the settlement of a suit, on sales of $1.11 billion. the company said normal seasonal softness and lost orders caused by prolonged labor talks reduced shipments by 200,000 tons in the latest quarter, compared with the second quarter. at the same time, the integrated-steel business was hurt by continued increases in materials costs and repair and maintenance expenses, as well as higher labor costs under its new contract. the service-center business was hurt by reduced margins and start-up costs associated with its joseph t. ryerson & son unit. the company said it is beginning to see some shipping-rate improvements in both the intergrated-steel and steel-service-center segments, which should result in improved results for the fourth quarter. inland said its third-quarter results will be announced later this week. in the year-earlier third quarter, when the industry was in the midst of a boom, the company had net of $61 million, or $1.70 a share, on sales of $1.02 billion.
predicting the financial results of computer firms has been a tough job lately. take microsoft corp., the largest maker of personal computer software and generally considered an industry bellwether. in july, the company stunned wall street with the prediction that growth in the personal computer business overall would be only 10% in 1990, a modest increase when compared with the sizzling expansion of years past. investors -- taking this as a sign that a broad industry slump was in the offing -- reacted by selling the company's stock, which lost $3.25 that day to close at $52 in national over-the-counter trading. but that was all of three months ago. last week, microsoft said it expects revenue for its first quarter ended sept. 30 to increase 34%. the announcement caused the company's stock to surge $6.50 to close at $75.50 a share. microsoft's surprising strength is one example of the difficulty facing investors looking for reassurances about the financial health of the computer firms. "it's hard to know what to expect at this point," said peter rogers, an analyst at robertson stephens & co. "the industry defies characterization." to illustrate, mr. rogers said that of the 14 computer-related firms he follows, half will report for their most recent quarter earnings below last year's results, and half above those results. among those companies expected to have a down quarter are hewlett-packard co., amdahl corp. and sun microsystems inc., generally solid performers in the past. international business machines corp. also is expected to report disappointing results. apple computer inc., meanwhile, is expected to show improved earnings for the period ended sept. another contradictory message comes from businessland inc., a computer retailer. in july, the company reported that booming sales of new personal computers from apple and ibm had resulted in net income more than doubling for its fourth quarter ended june 30 to $7.4 million, or 23 cents a share. this month, however, businessland warned investors that results for its first quarter ended sept. 30 hadn't met expectations. the company said it expects earnings of 14 to 17 cents a share, down from 25 cents a share in the year-earlier period. while the earnings picture confuses, observers say the major forces expected to shape the industry in the coming year are clearer. companies will continue to war over standards. in computer publishing, a battle over typefaces is hurting adobe systems inc., which sells software that controls the image produced by printers and displays. until recently, adobe had a lock on the market for image software, but last month apple, adobe's biggest customer, and microsoft rebelled. now the two firms are collaborating on an alternative to adobe's approach, and analysts say they are likely to carry ibm, the biggest seller of personal computers, along with them. the short-term outlook for adobe's business, however, appears strong. the company is beginning to ship a new software program that's being heralded as a boon for owners of low-end printers sold by apple. the program is aimed at improving the quality of printed material. john warnock, adobe's chief executive officer, said the mountain view, calif., company has been receiving 1,000 calls a day about the product since it was demonstrated at a computer publishing conference several weeks ago. meanwhile, competition between various operating systems, which control the basic functions of a computer, spells trouble for software firms generally. "it creates uncertainty and usually slows down sales," said russ crabs, an analyst at soundview financial group. mr. crabs said this probably is behind the expected weak performance of aldus corp., maker of a widely used computer publishing program. he expects aldus to report earnings of 21 cents a share on revenues of $19.5 million for its third quarter, compared with earnings of 30 cents a share on revenue of 20.4 million in the year-earlier period. aldus officials couldn't be reached for comment. on the other hand, the battle of the bus is expected to grow increasingly irrelevant. a bus is the data highway within a computer. ibm is backing one type of bus called microchannel, while the nine other leading computer makers, including h-p and compaq computer corp., have chosen another method. "users don't care about the bus," said daniel benton, an analyst at goldman, sachs & co. he said apple's family of macintosh computers, for instance, uses four different buses "and no one seems to mind." the gap between winners and laggards will grow. in personal computers, apple, compaq and ibm are expected to tighten their hold on their business. at the same time, second-tier firms will continue to lose ground. some lagging competitors even may leave the personal computer business altogether. wyse technology, for instance, is considered a candidate to sell its troubled operation. "wyse has done well establishing a distribution business, but they haven't delivered products that sell," said kimball brown, an analyst at prudential-bache securities. mr. brown estimates wyse, whose terminals business is strong, will report a loss of 12 cents a share for its quarter ended sept. personal-computer makers will continue to eat away at the business of more traditional computer firms. ever-more powerful desk-top computers, designed with one or more microprocessors as their "brains," are expected to increasingly take on functions carried out by more expensive minicomputers and mainframes. "the guys that make traditional hardware are really being obsoleted by microprocessor-based machines," said mr. benton. as a result of this trend, longtime powerhouses h-p, ibm and digital equipment corp. are scrambling to counterattack with microprocessor-based systems of their own. but they will have to act quickly. mr. benton expects compaq to unveil a family of high-end personal computers later this year that are powerful enough to serve as the hub for communications within large networks of desk-top machines. a raft of new computer companies also has targeted this "server" market.
population drain ends for midwestern states iowa is making a comeback. so are indiana, ohio and michigan. the population of all four states is on the upswing, according to new census bureau estimates, following declines throughout the early 1980s. the gains, to be sure, are rather small. iowa, for instance, saw its population grow by 11,000 people, or 0.4%, between 1987 and 1988, the census bureau says. still, even that modest increase is good news for a state that hadn't grown at all since 1981. between 1987 and 1988, north dakota was the only state in the midwest to lose population, a loss of 4,000 people. six of the 12 midwestern states have been growing steadily since 1980 -- illinois, kansas, minnesota, missouri, south dakota and wisconsin. the northeast has been holding its own in the population race. seven of nine states have grown each year since 1980, including new york, which lost 4% of its population during the 1970s. and although pennsylvania and massachusetts suffered slight declines earlier in the decade, they are growing again. at the same time, several states in the south and west have had their own population turnaround. seven states that grew in the early 1980s are now losing population -- west virginia, mississippi, louisiana, oklahoma, montana, wyoming and alaska. overall, though, the south and west still outpace the northeast and midwest, and fast-growing states like florida and california ensure that the pattern will continue. but the growth gap between the sun belt and other regions has clearly started narrowing. more elderly maintain their independence thanks to modern medicine, more couples are growing old together. and even after losing a spouse, more of the elderly are staying independent. a new census bureau study of the noninstitutionalized population shows that 64% of people aged 65 to 74 were living with a spouse in 1988, up from 59% in 1970. this doesn't mean they're less likely to live alone, however. that share has remained at about 24% since 1970. what has changed is that more of the young elderly are living with spouses rather than with other relatives, such as children. in 1988, 10% of those aged 65 to 74 lived with relatives other than spouses, down from 15% in 1970. as people get even older, many become widowed. but even among those aged 75 and older, the share living with a spouse rose slightly, to 40% in 1988 from 38% in 1970. like their younger counterparts, the older elderly are less likely to live with other relatives. only 17% of those aged 75 and older lived with relatives other than spouses in 1988, down from 26% in 1970. the likelihood of living alone beyond the age of 75 has increased to 40% from 32%. more people are remaining independent longer presumably because they are better off physically and financially. careers count most for the well-to-do many affluent people place personal success and money above family. at least that's what a survey by ernst & young and yankelovich, clancy, shulman indicates. two-thirds of respondents said they strongly felt the need to be successful in their jobs, while fewer than half said they strongly felt the need to spend more time with their families. being successful in careers and spending the money they make are top priorities for this group. unlike most studies of the affluent market, this survey excluded the super-rich. average household income for the sample was $194,000, and average net assets were reported as $775,000. the goal was to learn about one of today's fastest-growing income groups, the upper-middle class. although they represent only 2% of the population, they control nearly one-third of discretionary income. across the board, these consumers value quality, buy what they like rather than just what they need, and appreciate products that are distinctive. despite their considerable incomes and assets, 40% of the respondents in the study don't feel financially secure, and one-fourth don't feel that they have made it. twenty percent don't even feel they are financially well off. many of the affluent aren't comfortable with themselves, either. about 40% don't feel they're more able than others. while twothirds feel some guilt about being affluent, only 25% give $2,500 or more to charity each year. thirty-five percent attend religious services regularly; at the same time, 60% feel that in life one sometimes has to compromise one's principles. odds and ends the number of women and minorities who hold jobs in top management in the nation's largest banks has more than doubled since 1978. the american bankers association says that women make up 47% of officials and managers in the top 50 banks, up from 33% in 1978. the share of minorities in those positions has risen to 16% from 12%. . . . per-capita personal income in the u.s. grew faster than inflation last year, according to the bureau of economic analysis. the amount of income divvied up for each man, woman and child was $16,489 in 1988, up 6.6% from $15,472 in 1987. per capita personal income ranged from $11,116 in mississippi to $23,059 in connecticut. . . . there are 13.1 million students in college this fall, up 2% from 1988, the national center for education statistics estimates. about 54% are women, and 44% are part-time students.
this small dallas suburb's got trouble. trouble with a capital t and that rhymes with p and that stands for pool. more than 30 years ago, prof. harold hill, the con man in meredith willson's "the music man," warned the citizens of river city, iowa, against the game. now kindred spirits on addison's town council have barred the town's fanciest hotel, the grand kempinski, from installing three free pool tables in its new lounge. mayor lynn spruill and two members of the council said they were worried about setting a precedent that would permit pool halls along addison's main street. and the mayor, in an admonition that bears a rhythmic resemblance to prof. hill's, warned that "alcohol leads to betting, which leads to fights." the council's action is yet another blow to a sport that its fans claim has been maligned unjustly for years. "obviously they're not in touch with what's going on," says tom manske, vice president of the national pocket billiards association. pool is hot in new york and chicago, he insists, where "upscale, suit-and-tie places" are adding tables. with today's tougher drunk driving laws, he adds, "people don't want to just sit around and drink." besides, rowdy behavior seems unlikely at the grand kempinski, where rooms average $200 a night and the cheap mixed drinks go for $3.50 a pop. at the lounge, manager elizabeth dyer won't admit patrons in jeans, t-shirts or tennis shoes. but a majority of the addison council didn't buy those arguments. introducing pool, argued councilwoman riley reinker, would be "dangerous. it would open a can of worms." addison is no stranger to cans of worms, either. after its previous mayor committed suicide last year, an investigation disclosed that town officials regularly voted on their own projects, gave special favors to developer friends and dipped into the town's coffers for trips and retreats. the revelations embarrassed town officials, although they argued that the problems weren't as severe as the media suggested. now comes the pool flap. "i think there's some people worried about something pretty ridiculous," councilman john nolan says. "i thought this was all taken care of in `the music man. '"
friday, october 13, 1989 the key u.s. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but don't always represent actual transactions. prime rate: 10 1/2%. the base rate on corporate loans at large u.s. money center commercial banks. federal funds: 8 13/16% high, 8 1/2% low, 8 5/8% near closing bid, 8 3/4% offered. reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $1 million or more. source: fulton prebon (u.s.a.) inc. discount rate: 7%. the charge on loans to depository institutions by the new york federal reserve bank. call money: 9 3/4% to 10%. the charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral. commercial paper placed directly by general motors acceptance corp.: 8.60% 30 to 44 days; 8.55% 45 to 59 days; 8.375% 60 to 79 days; 8.50% 80 to 89 days; 8.25% 90 to 119 days; 8.125% 120 to 149 days; 8% 150 to 179 days; 7.625% 180 to 270 days. commercial paper: high-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $1,000: 8.65% 30 days; 8.55% 60 days; 8.55% 90 days. certificates of deposit: 8.15% one month; 8.15% two months; 8.13% three months; 8.11% six months; 8.08% one year. average of top rates paid by major new york banks on primary new issues of negotiable c.d.s, usually on amounts of $1 million and more. the minimum unit is $100,000. typical rates in the secondary market: 8.65% one month; 8.65% three months; 8.55% six months. bankers acceptances: 8.52% 30 days; 8.37% 60 days; 8.15% 90 days; 7.98% 120 days; 7.92% 150 days; 7.80% 180 days. negotiable, bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order. london late eurodollars: 8 13/16% to 8 11/16% one month; 8 13/16% to 8 11/16% two months; 8 13/16% to 8 11/16% three months; 8 3/4% to 8 5/8% four months; 8 11/16% to 8 9/16% five months; 8 5/8% to 8 1/2% six months. london interbank offered rates (libor): 8 3/4% one month; 8 3/4% three months; 8 9/16% six months; 8 9/16% one year. the average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the london market based on quotations at five major banks. foreign prime rates: canada 13.50%; germany 8.50%; japan 4.875%; switzerland 8.50%; britain 15%. these rate indications aren't directly comparable; lending practices vary widely by location. treasury bills: results of the tuesday, october 10, 1989, auction of short-term u.s. government bills, sold at a discount from face value in units of $10,000 to $1 million: 7.63% 13 weeks; 7.60% 26 weeks. federal home loan mortgage corp. (freddie mac): posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days. 9.91%, standard conventional fixedrate mortgages; 7.875%, 2% rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. federal national mortgage association (fannie mae): posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days (priced at par) 9.86%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 8.85%, 6/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. merrill lynch ready assets trust: 8.33%. annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days; not a forecast of future returns.
pension funds, insurers and other behemoths of the investing world said they began scooping up stocks during friday's market rout. and they plan to buy more today. rightly or wrongly, many giant institutional investors appear to be fighting the latest war by applying the lesson they learned in the october 1987 crash: buying at the bottom pays off. to be sure, big investors might put away their checkbooks in a hurry if stocks open sharply lower today. they could still panic and bail out of the market. but their 1987 performance indicates that they won't abandon stocks unless conditions get far worse. "last time, we got rewarded for going out and buying stocks when the panic was the worst," said john w. rogers, president of chicago-based ariel capital management inc., which manages $1.1 billion of stocks. mr. rogers spent half his cash on hand friday for "our favorite stocks that have fallen apart." he expects to invest the rest if the market weakens further. denver-based portfolio manager james craig wasn't daunted when friday's rout shaved $40 million from the value of the $752 million janus fund he oversees. "i waited to make sure all the program trades had kicked through," he said. then he jumped into the market: "i spent $30 million in the last half-hour." other money managers also opened their wallets. "i was buying at the close (friday) and i'll be buying again because i know we're getting good value," said frederick a. moran, president of moran asset management inc., greenwich, conn. "there is no justification on the fundamental level for this crash." unlike mutual funds, which can be forced to sell stockholdings when investors rush to withdraw money, big investors such as pension funds and insurance companies can decide to ride out market storms without jettisoning stock. most often, they do just that, because stocks have proved to be the best-performing long-term investment, attracting about $1 trillion from pension funds alone. "if you bought after the crash, you did very very well off the bottom," said stephen b. timbers, chief investment officer of chicago-based kemper financial services inc. the $56 billion california public employees retirement system, for one, added $1 billion to its stock portfolio two years ago. "the last crash taught institutional investors that they have to be long-term holders, and that they can't react to short-term events, good or bad," said stephen l. nesbitt, senior vice president for the pension consultants wilshire associates in santa monica, calif. "those that pulled out (of stocks) regretted it," he said, "so i doubt you'll see any significant changes" in institutional portfolios as a result of friday's decline. stocks, as measured by the standard & poor's 500-stock index, have been stellar performers this year, rising 27.97% before friday's plunge, excluding dividends. even friday's slump leaves investors ahead more than 20%, well above the annual average for stocks over several decades. "you could go down 400 points and still have a good year in the market," said james d. awad, president of new york-based bmi capital corp. mr. awad, however, worries that the market "could go down 800 or 900 points in the next few days. it can happen before you can turn around." he said he discerns many parallels with 1987, including the emphasis on takeover stocks and the re-emergence of computerized program trading. "the only thing you don't have," he said, "is the `portfolio insurance' phenomenon overlaid on the rest." most institutional investors have abandoned the portfolio insurance hedging technique, which is widely thought to have worsened the 1987 crash. not really insurance, this tactic was designed to soften the blow of declining stock prices and generate an offsetting profit by selling waves of s&p futures contracts. in its severest test, the $60 billion of portfolio insurance in effect in the 1987 crash didn't work, as stock buyers disappeared and stock and futures prices became disconnected. even without portfolio insurance, market conditions were grim friday, money managers said. neil weisman, whose new york-based chilmark capital partners had converted 85% of its $220 million investment pool to cash in recent months, said he was besieged by wall street firms friday asking him to take stock off their hands. "we got calls from big block houses asking us if we want to make bids on anything," said mr. weisman, who, happy with his returns on investments chalked up earlier, declined the offers. mr. weisman predicts stocks will appear to stabilize in the next few days before declining again, trapping more investors. "i think it will be a rigor mortis rally," he said. meanwhile, friday brought a reprieve for money managers whose investment styles had put them at odds with the market rally. especially gleeful were the short sellers, who have been pounded by this year's market climb. the shorts sell borrowed shares, hoping to profit by replacing them later at a lower price. the nation's largest short-selling operation is feshbach brothers, palo alto, calif., which said last may that its short positions had shown losses of 10% for the year up to that point. all that now has changed. "we're ahead for the year because of friday," said the firm's kurt feshbach. "we're not making a killing, but we had a good day."
food and drug administration spokesman jeff nesbit said the agency has turned over evidence in a criminal investigation concerning vitarine pharmaceuticals inc. to the u.s. attorney's office in baltimore. neither vitarine nor any of the springfield gardens, n.y., company's officials or employees have been charged with any crimes. vitarine won approval to market a version of a blood pressure medicine but acknowledged that it substituted a smithkline beecham plc product as its own in tests. mr. nesbit also said the fda has asked bolar pharmaceutical co. to recall at the retail level its urinary tract antibiotic. but so far the company hasn't complied with that request, the spokesman said. bolar, the subject of a criminal investigation by the fda and the inspector general's office of the health and human services department, only agreed to recall two strengths of its version of macrodantin "as far down as direct customers, mostly wholesalers," mr. nesbit said. bolar, of copiague, n.y., earlier began a voluntary recall of both its 100 milligram and 50 milligram versions of the drug. the fda has said it presented evidence it uncovered to the company indicating that bolar substituted the brand-name product for its own to gain government approval to sell generic versions of macrodantin. bolar has denied that it switched the brand-name product for its own in such testing.
the west german retailer asko deutsche kaufhaus ag plans to challenge the legality of a widely employed anti-takeover defense of companies in the netherlands. the eventual court decision could become a landmark in dutch corporate law because the lawsuit asko plans to file would be the first to challenge the entire principle and practice of companies issuing voting preferred shares to management-controlled trusts to dilute voting power of common stockholders. up to now only specific aspects of these defenses have been challenged, though unsuccessfully, asko's dutch lawyers noted. should the courts uphold the validity of this type of defense, asko will then ask the court to overturn such a vote-diluting maneuver recently deployed by koninklijke ahold nv. asko says the dutch-based international food retailer hadn't reasonable grounds to issue preferred stock to a friendly trust and thus dilute the worth and voting power of asko and other shareholders. speaking through its dutch lawyers, asko also disclosed it holds a 15% stake in ahold. it was previously thought asko held a 13.6% stake that was accumulated since july. a spokesman for ahold said his company is confident of its own position and the propriety of the preferred-share issue. he termed asko's legal actions as "unproductive" to international cooperation among european retailers.
plunge? what plunge? twenty-four new york stock exchange issues hit 52-week highs during friday's trading, despite the dow jones industrial average's 190.58-point plunge. stocks of utilities held up relatively better than other market sectors during the sell-off. and among the issues hitting new highs were detroit edison co. and niagara mohawk power corp. other major issues hitting highs included american telephone & telegraph co., westinghouse electric corp., exxon corp. and cigna corp., the big insurer. of course, many more issues -- 93 -- hit new lows. these included international business machines corp., which during friday's session traded below $100 a share for the first time since june 1984. ibm closed at $102, down $5.625. other new lows included navistar international corp., union carbide corp. and bethlehem steel corp., all of which are included in the industrial average. meanwhile, two initial public offerings braved the cascading market in their maiden day of national over-the-counter trading friday. shares of rally's inc., an operator of fast-food restaurants, closed at $17 each, up from its $15 offering price and shares of employee benefit plans inc., a health-care consultant, closed at $14.125, up from its $12 offering price.
investors who bought stock with borrowed money -- that is, "on margin" -- may be more worried than most following friday's market drop. that's because their brokers can require them to sell some shares or put up more cash to enhance the collateral backing their loans. in october 1987, these margin calls were thought to have contributed to the downward spiral of the stock market. typically, a margin call occurs when the price of a stock falls below 75% of its original value. if the investor doesn't put up the extra cash to satisfy the call, the brokerage firm may begin liquidating the securities. but some big brokerage firms said they don't expect major problems as a result of margin calls. margin calls since friday "have been higher than usual, but reasonable," a spokesman for shearson lehman hutton inc. said. merrill lynch & co. officials "don't expect {margin calls} to be as big a factor as in 1987" because fewer individual investors are buying stock on margin, a spokesman said. hugo quackenbush, senior vice president at charles schwab corp., the san francisco-based discount brokerage firm, said he didn't expect any immediate problems with margin calls for schwab customers. he said schwab had increased margin requirements "so customers have more of a cushion." he added: "we learned a lesson in 1987 about volatility."
avis inc., following rival hertz corp. 's lead, said it is backing out of frequent-flier programs with three airlines. the garden city, n.y., car-rental company said it won't renew contracts with nwa inc. 's northwest airlines unit, pan am corp. 's pan american world airways unit and midway airlines at the end of this year. but it remains involved in programs with amr corp. 's american airlines unit and delta air lines. industry estimates put avis's annual cost of all five programs at between $8 million and $14 million. a spokesman for avis wouldn't specify the costs but said the three airlines being dropped account for "far less than half" of the total. budget rent a car corp., of chicago, and national car rental systems inc., of minneapolis, both said they had no plans to follow suit. in fact, budget indicated it saw some benefit to staying involved in these programs, in which renters earn frequent-flier miles and fliers can get car-rental discounts. "i cannot see how this news by hertz and avis cannot benefit budget's programs," said bob wilson, budget's vice president, marketing planning. northwest and midway are two of the five airlines with which budget has agreements. national also participates in the northwest frequent-flier program along with four other airlines, including delta and usair group inc. 's usair unit. a month ago, hertz, of park ridge, n.j., said that it would drop its marketing agreements at year end with delta, america west and texas air corp. 's continental airlines and eastern airlines, and that pacts with american airlines, ual inc's united airlines and usair also would be ended. . . sometime after dec. 31. at the time, hertz said its annual fees to those airlines amounted to $20 million and that the value of redeemed awards topped $15 million. analysts and competitors, however, doubt the numbers were that high. budget said its frequent-flier costs are "substantially below" avis's level. robert d. cardillo, avis vice president of marketing, said, "the proliferation and costs attached to {frequent-flier programs} have significantly diminished their value." this year has been difficult for both hertz and avis, said charles finnie, car-rental industry analyst at alex. brown & sons. "they've been looking to get their costs down, and this is a fairly sensible way to do it," he said.
cbs inc. is cutting "the pat sajak show" down to one hour from its current 90 minutes. cbs insisted the move wasn't a setback for the program, which is the network's first entry into the late-night talk show format since 1972. "i have every intention of making this the best possible show and having it run one hour is the best way to it," said rod perth, who was named vice president of late night entertainment in august. "this will raise the energy level of the show." cbs will continue to program action-adventure shows to follow the sajak hour. but cbs news will extend its four-hour "nightwatch" by 30 minutes and begin at 1:30 a.m. the show, despite a promising start, has slipped badly in the weekly ratings as compiled by a.c. nielsen co., finishing far below "tonight" on nbc, a unit of general electric co., and "nightline" on abc-tv, a unit of capital cities/abc inc. further fractioning the late-night audience is the addition of the "arsenio hall show," syndicated by paramount communications inc.
tandem computers inc., preparing to fight with international business machines corp. for a piece of the mainframe business, said it expects to post higher revenue and earnings for its fiscal fourth quarter ended sept. 30. tandem said it expects to report revenue of about $450 million and earnings of 35 cents to 40 cents a share. the results, which are in line with analysts' estimates, reflect "a continued improvement in our u.s. business," said james treybig, tandem's chief executive officer. in the year-earlier period, tandem reported net income of $30.1 million, or 31 cents a share, on revenue of $383.9 million. tandem expects to report the full results for the quarter next week. analysts have predicted that the cupertino, calif., company will report revenue of $430 million to $460 million and earnings of 35 cents to 40 cents a share. commenting on the results for the quarter, mr. treybig said the strength of the company's domestic business came as "a surprise" to him, noting that sales "in every region of the u.s. exceeded our plan." the company's u.s. performance was helped by "a record quarter for new customers," he said. tandem makes "fault-tolerant" computers -- machines with built-in backup systems -- that run stock exchanges, networks of automatic tellers and other complex computer systems. tomorrow the company is scheduled to announce its most powerful computer ever, which for the first time will bring it into direct competition with makers of mainframe computers. tandem's new high-end computer is called cyclone. prices for the machine, which can come in various configurations, are $2 million to $10 million. analysts expect the new computer to wrest a hefty slice of business away from ibm, the longtime leader in mainframes. "we believe they could siphon perhaps two to three billion dollars from ibm" over the next few years, said george weiss, an analyst at the gartner group. that will spur tandem's growth. "i'd be disappointed if the company grew by less than 20% next year," said john levinson, an analyst at goldman, sachs & co. ibm is expected to respond to tandem's cyclone by discounting its own mainframes, which analysts say are roughly three times the price of a comparable system from tandem. "obviously ibm can give bigger discounts to users immediately," said mr. weiss. but mr. treybig questions whether that will be enough to stop tandem's first mainframe from taking on some of the functions that large organizations previously sought from big blue's machines. "the answer isn't price reductions, but new systems," he said. nevertheless, tandem faces a variety of challenges, the biggest being that customers generally view the company's computers as complementary to ibm's mainframes. even mr. treybig is reluctant to abandon this notion, insisting that tandem's new machines aren't replacements for ibm's mainframes. "we're after a little bigger niche," he said.
the chemical industry is expected to report that profits eroded in the third quarter because of skidding prices in the commodity end of the business. producers of commodity chemicals, the basic chemicals produced in huge volumes for other manufacturers, have seen sharp inventory cutting by buyers. once the chief beneficiaries of the industry's now fading boom, these producers also will be reporting against exceptionally strong performances in the 1988 third quarter. "for some of these companies, this will be the first quarter with year-to-year negative comparisons," says leonard bogner, a chemical industry analyst at prudential bache research. "this could be the first of five or six down quarters." perhaps most prominent, dow chemical co., which as of midyear had racked up eight consecutive record quarters, is expected to report that profit decreased in the latest quarter from a year earlier, if only by a shade. though dow has aggressively diversified into specialty chemicals and pharmaceuticals, the company still has a big stake in polyethylene, which is used in packaging and housewares. analysts' third-quarter estimates for the midland, mich., company are between $3.20 a share and $3.30 a share, compared with $3.36 a year ago, when profit was $632 million on sales of $4.15 billion. a dow spokeswoman declined to comment on the estimates. at the investment firm of smith barney, harris upham & co., the commodity-chemical segment is seen pulling down overall profit for 20 companies representative of the whole industry by 8% to 10%. "you will find the commodities off more than the others and the diversified companies about even or slightly better," says james wilbur, a smith barney analyst. first boston corp. projects that 10 of the 15 companies it follows will report lower profit. most of the 10 have big commodity-chemical operations. still, some industry giants are expected to report continuing gains, largely because so much of their business is outside commodity chemicals. du pont co. is thought to have had steady profit growth in white pigments, fibers and polymers. moreover, the wilmington, del., company is helped when prices weaken on the commodity chemicals it buys for its own production needs, such as ethylene. analysts are divided over whether du pont will report much of a gain in the latest quarter from its conoco inc. oil company. the estimates for du pont range from $2.25 to $2.45 a share. in the 1988 third quarter, the company earned $461 million, or $1.91 a share, on sales of $7.99 billion. du pont declined to comment. monsanto co., too, is expected to continue reporting higher profit, even though its sales of crop chemicals were hurt in the latest quarter by drought in northern europe and the western u.s. the st. louis-based company is expected to report again that losses in its g.d. searle & co. pharmaceutical business are narrowing. searle continued to operate in the red through the first half of the year, but monsanto has said it expects searle to post a profit for all of 1989. most estimates for monsanto run between $1.70 and $2 a share. a year ago, the company posted third-quarter profit of $116 million, or $1.67 a share, on sales of $2.02 billion. monsanto declined to comment. but the commodity-chemical producers are caught on the downside of a pricing cycle. by some accounts on wall street and in the industry, the inventory reductions are near an end, which may presage firmer demand. but doubters say growing production capacity could keep pressure on prices into the early 1990s. in the latest quarter, at least, profit is expected to fall sharply. for himont inc., "how far down it is, we don't know," says leslie ravitz at salomon brothers. the projections are in the neighborhood of 50 cents a share to 75 cents, compared with a restated $1.65 a share a year earlier, when profit was $107.8 million on sales of $435.5 million. himont faces lower prices for its mainstay product, polypropylene, while it goes forward with a heavy capital investment program to bolster its raw material supply and develop new uses for polypropylene, whose markets include the packaging and automobile industries. the company, based in wilmington, del., is 81%-owned by montedison s.p. a., milan, which has an offer outstanding for the himont shares it doesn't already own. at quantum chemical corp., new york, the trouble is lower prices for polyethylene, higher debt costs and the idling of an important plant due to an explosion. some analysts hedge their estimates for quantum, because it isn't known when the company will book certain one-time charges. but the estimates range from break-even to 35 cents a share. in the 1988 third quarter, quantum earned $99.8 million, or $3.92 a share, on sales of $724.4 million. another big polyethylene producer, union carbide corp., is expected to post profit of between $1 a share and $1.25, compared with $1.56 a share a year earlier, when the company earned $213 million on sales of $2.11 billion. himont, quantum and union carbide all declined to comment.
the following were among friday's offerings and pricings in the u.s. and non-u.s. capital markets, with terms and syndicate manager, as compiled by dow jones capital markets report: dow chemical co. -- $150 million of 8.55% senior notes due oct. 15, 2009, priced at par. the issue, which is puttable back to the company at par on oct. 15, 1999, was priced at a spread of 50 basis points above the treasury's 10-year note. rated single-a-1 by moody's investors service inc. and single-a by standard & poor's corp., the non-callable issue will be sold through underwriters led by merrill lynch capital markets. centel capital corp. -- $150 million of 9% debentures due oct. 15, 2019, priced at 99.943 to yield 9.008%. the non-callable issue, which can be put back to the company in 1999, was priced at 99 basis points above the treasury's 10-year note. rated baa-1 by moody's and triple-b-plus by s&p, the issue will be sold through underwriters led by morgan stanley & co. federal home loan mortgage corp. -- $500 million of remic mortgage securities offered in 13 classes by prudential-bache securities inc. the offering, series 102, backed by freddie mac 8 1/2% securities with a weighted average remaining term to maturity of 28.4 years, was priced before the market's afternoon surge. among classes for which details were available, yields ranged from 8.78%, or 75 basis points over two-year treasury securities, to 10.05%, or 200 basis points over 10-year treasurys. federal home loan mortgage corp. -- $300 million of remic mortgage securities offered by citicorp securities markets inc. the offering, series 101, is backed by freddie mac 9 1/2% securities. pricing details weren't immediately available. federal home loan mortgage corp. -- $200 million of stripped mortgage securities underwritten by bt securities corp. the agency's first strips issue, collateralized by freddie mac 8% securities pooled into a single security called a giant, will be divided into interest-only and principal-only securities. the collateral is being sold by a thrift institution. the principal-only securities will be repackaged by bt securities into a freddie mac remic, series 103, that will have six classes. the interest-only securities will be sold separately by bt securities. the principal-only securities pay the principal from the underlying freddie mac 8% securities, while the interest-only securities pay only interest. freddie mac said the principal-only securities were priced at 58 1/4 to yield 8.45%, assuming an average life of eight years and a prepayment of 160% of the psa model. the interest-only securities were priced at 35 1/2 to yield 10.72%. there were no major eurobond or foreign bond offerings in europe friday.
friday, october 27, 1989 the key u.s. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but don't always represent actual transactions. prime rate: 10 1/2%. the base rate on corporate loans at large u.s. money center commercial banks. federal funds: 8 3/4% high, 8 11/16% low, 8 5/8% near closing bid, 8 11/16% offered. reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $1 million or more. source: fulton prebon (u.s.a.) inc. discount rate: 7%. the charge on loans to depository institutions by the new york federal reserve bank. call money: 9 3/4% to 10%. the charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral. commercial paper placed directly by general motors acceptance corp.: 8.50% 30 to 44 days; 8.25% 45 to 65 days; 8.375% 66 to 89 days; 8% 90 to 119 days; 7.875% 120 to 149 days; 7.75% 150 to 179 days; 7.50% 180 to 270 days. commercial paper: high-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $1,000: 8.575% 30 days; 8.475% 60 days; 8.40% 90 days. certificates of deposit: 8.09% one month; 8.04% two months; 8.03% three months; 7.96% six months; 7.92% one year. average of top rates paid by major new york banks on primary new issues of negotiable c.d.s, usually on amounts of $1 million and more. the minimum unit is $100,000. typical rates in the secondary market: 8.55% one month; 8.50% three months; 8.40% six months. bankers acceptances: 8.52% 30 days; 8.35% 60 days; 8.33% 90 days; 8.17% 120 days; 8.08% 150 days; 8% 180 days. negotiable, bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order. london late eurodollars: 8 11/16% to 8 9/16% one month; 8 5/8% to 8 1/2% two months; 8 11/16% to 8 9/16% three months; 8 9/16% to 8 7/16% four months; 8 1/2% to 8 3/8% five months; 8 7/16% to 8 5/16% six months. london interbank offered rates (libor): 8 11/16% one month; 8 11/16% three months; 8 7/16% six months; 8 3/8% one year. the average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the london market based on quotations at five major banks. foreign prime rates: canada 13.50%; germany 9%; japan 4.875%; switzerland 8.50%; britain 15%. these rate indications aren't directly comparable; lending practices vary widely by location. treasury bills: results of the monday, october 23, 1989, auction of short-term u.s. government bills, sold at a discount from face value in units of $10,000 to $1 million: 7.52% 13 weeks; 7.50% 26 weeks. federal home loan mortgage corp. (freddie mac): posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days. 9.80%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 7.875%, 2% rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. federal national mortgage association (fannie mae): posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days (priced at par) 9.75%, standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages; 8.70%, 6/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages. source: telerate systems inc. merrill lynch ready assets trust: 8.65%. annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days; not a forecast of future returns.
three new issues begin trading on the new york stock exchange today, and one began trading on the nasdaq/national market system last week. on the big board, crawford & co., atlanta, (cfd) begins trading today. crawford evaluates health care plans, manages medical and disability aspects of worker's compensation injuries and is involved in claims adjustments for insurance companies. also beginning trading today on the big board are el paso refinery limited partnership, el paso, texas, (elp) and franklin multi-income trust, san mateo, calif., (fmi). el paso owns and operates a petroleum refinery. franklin is a closed-end management investment company. on the nasdaq over-the-counter system, allied capital corp., washington, d.c., (alii) began trading last thursday. allied capital is a closed-end management investment company that will operate as a business development concern.
as competition heats up in spain's crowded bank market, banco exterior de espana is seeking to shed its image of a state-owned bank and move into new activities. under the direction of its new chairman, francisco luzon, spain's seventh largest bank is undergoing a tough restructuring that analysts say may be the first step toward the bank's privatization. the state-owned industrial holding company instituto nacional de industria and the bank of spain jointly hold a 13.94% stake in banco exterior. the government directly owns 51.4% and factorex, a financial services company, holds 8.42%. the rest is listed on spanish stock exchanges. some analysts are concerned, however, that banco exterior may have waited too long to diversify from its traditional export-related activities. catching up with commercial competitors in retail banking and financial services, they argue, will be difficult, particularly if market conditions turn sour. if that proves true, analysts say banco exterior could be a prime partner -- or even a takeover target -- for either a spanish or foreign bank seeking to increase its market share after 1992, when the european community plans to dismantle financial barriers. with 700 branches in spain and 12 banking subsidiaries, five branches and 12 representative offices abroad, the banco exterior group has a lot to offer a potential suitor. mr. luzon and his team, however, say they aren't interested in a merger. instead, they are working to transform banco exterior into an efficient bank by the end of 1992. "i want this to be a model of the way a public-owned company should be run," mr. luzon says. banco exterior was created in 1929 to provide subsidized credits for spanish exports. the market for export financing was liberalized in the mid-1980s, however, forcing the bank to face competition. at the same time, many of spain's traditional export markets in latin america and other developing areas faced a sharp decline in economic growth. as a result, the volume of banco exterior's export credit portfolio plunged from 824 billion pesatas ($7.04 billion) as of dec. 31, 1986, to its current 522 billion pesetas. the other two main pillars of banco exterior's traditional business -- wholesale banking and foreign currency trading -- also began to crumble under the weight of heavy competition and changing client needs. the bank was hamstrung in its efforts to face the challenges of a changing market by its links to the government, analysts say. until mr. luzon took the helm last november, banco exterior was run by politicians who lacked either the skills or the will to introduce innovative changes. but mr. luzon has moved swiftly to streamline bureaucracy, cut costs, increase capital and build up new areas of business. "we've got a lot to do," he acknowledged. "we've got to move quickly." in mr. luzon's first year, the bank eliminated 800 jobs. now it says it'll trim another 1,200 jobs over the next three to four years. the bank employs 8,000 people in spain and 2,000 abroad. to strengthen its capital base, banco exterior this year issued $105 million in subordinated debt, launched two rights issues and sold stock held in its treasury to small investors. the bank is now aggressively marketing retail services at its domestic branches. last year's drop in export credit was partially offset by a 15% surge in lending to individuals and small and medium-sized companies. though spain has an excess of banks, analysts say the country still has one of the most profitable markets in europe, which will aid banco exterior with the tough tasks it faces ahead. expansion plans also include acquisitions in growing foreign markets. the bank says it's interested in purchasing banks in morocco, portugal and puerto rico. but the bank's retail activities in latin america are likely to be cut back. banco exterior was one of the last banks to create a brokerage house before the four spanish stock exchanges underwent sweeping changes in july. the late start may be a handicap for the bank as spain continues to open up its market to foreign competition. but mr. luzon contends that the experienced team he brought with him from banco bilbao vizcaya, where he was formerly director general, will whip the bank's capital market division into shape by the end of 1992. the bank also says it'll use its international network to channel investment from london, frankfurt, zurich and paris into the spanish stock exchanges.
the fiscal 1989 budget deficit figure came out friday. it was down a little. the next time you hear a member of congress moan about the deficit, consider what congress did friday. the senate, 84-6, voted to increase to $124,000 the ceiling on insured mortgages from the fha, which lost $4.2 billion in loan defaults last year. then, by voice vote, the senate voted a pork-barrel bill, approved thursday by the house, for domestic military construction. compare the bush request to what the senators gave themselves: for construction in west virginia, mr. bush requested $4.5 million; congress gave senator byrd's state $21.5 million. senator byrd is chairman of the appropriations committee. for iowa, a $1.8 million request became $12 million for senator grassley, ranking minority member of a military construction subcommittee. rep. jamie whitten of mississippi and chairman of house appropriations turned a $20 million bush request for his state into a $49.7 million bequest. senator sasser of tennessee is chairman of the appropriations subcommittee on military construction; mr. bush's $87 million request for tennessee increased to $109 million. in a remark someone should remember this time next year, senator sasser said, "i think we've seen the peak of military construction spending for many years to come." tell us about spending restraint. tell us about the hud scandals. tell us what measure, short of house arrest, will get this congress under control.
october employment data -- also could turn out to be the most confusing. on the surface, the overall unemployment rate is expected to be little changed from september's 5.3%. but the actual head count of non-farm employment payroll jobs is likely to be muddied by the impact of hurricane hugo, strikes, and less-than-perfect seasonal adjustments, economists said. the consensus view calls for an overall job gain of 155,000 compared with september's 209,000 increase. but the important factory-jobs segment, which last month plunged by 103,000 positions and raised recession fears, is most likely to be skewed by the month's unusual events. several other reports come before friday's jobs data, including: the september leading indicators index, new-home sales and october agricultural prices reports due out tomorrow; the october purchasing managers' index and september construction spending and manufacturers' orders on wednesday; and october chain-store sales on thursday. friday brings the final count on october auto sales. "the employment report is going to be difficult to interpret," said michael englund, economist with mms international, a unit of mcgraw-hill inc., new york. mr. englund added that next month's data isn't likely to be much better, because it will be distorted by san francisco's earthquake. what's more, he believes seasonal swings in the auto industry this year aren't occurring at the same time as in the past, because of production and pricing differences that are curbing the accuracy of seasonal adjustments built into the employment data. wednesday's report from the purchasing agents will be watched to see if the index maintains a level below 50%, as it has for the past couple of months. a reading of less than 50% indicates an economy that is generally contracting while a reading above 50% indicates an economy that's expanding. samuel d. kahan, chief financial economist at kleinwort benson government securities inc., chicago, said that the purchasers' report is valuable because it often presents the first inkling of economic data for the month. but he added: "some people use the purchasers' index as a leading indicator, some use it as a coincident indicator. but the thing it's supposed to measure -- manufacturing strength -- it missed altogether last month." david wyss, chief financial economist at data resources inc., boston, said that the purchasers' index "does miss occasionally," adding: "when it misses one month it tends to miss the next month, too." the consensus view on september leading indicators calls for a gain of 0.3%, the same as in august. economists said greatly increased consumer optimism, a larger money supply and higher stock prices helped lift the index. all orders-related components, such as consumer-goods orders and building permits, are thought to have been weaker. data resources' mr. wyss added that he will be keeping a closer eye than ususal on october chain-store sales. usually, october "isn't a very interesting month {for retail figures} because school clothes have been bought and people are waiting for december to buy christmas presents," he said. but mr. wyss said he will watch the numbers to get an inkling of whether consumers' general buying habits may slack off as much as their auto-buying apparently has. he noted that higher gasoline prices will help buoy the october totals. seasonal factors are also expected to have taken their toll on september new-home sales, which are believed to have fallen sharply from august's 755,000 units. construction spending is believed to have slipped about 0.5% from august levels, although economists noted the rate probably will pick up in the months ahead in response to hurricane and earthquake damage.
general motors corp. and ford motor co. are now going head to head in the markets for shares of jaguar plc, as gm got early clearance from the federal trade commission to boost its stake in the british luxury car maker. gm confirmed friday that it received permission late thursday from u.s. antitrust regulators to increase its jaguar holdings past the $15 million level. ford got a similar go-ahead earlier in october, and on friday, jaguar announced that the no. 2 u.s. auto maker had raised its stake to 13.2%, or 24.2 million shares, from 12.4% earlier in the week. a spokesman for gm, the no. 1 auto maker, declined to say how many jaguar shares that company owns. in late trading friday, jaguar shares bucked the downward tide in london's stock market and rose five pence to 725 pence ($11.44). trading volume was a moderately heavy 3.1 million shares. in the u.s., jaguar's american depositary receipts were among the most active issues friday in national over-the-counter trading where they closed at $11.625 each, up 62.5 cents. analysts expect that the two u.s. auto giants will move quickly to buy up 15% stakes in jaguar, setting up a potential bidding war for the prestigious jaguar brand. british government restrictions prevent any single shareholder from going beyond 15% before the end of 1990 without government permission. the british government, which owned jaguar until 1984, still holds a controlling "golden share" in the company. with the golden share as protection, jaguar officials have rebuffed ford's overtures, and moved instead to forge an alliance with gm. jaguar officials have indicated they are close to wrapping up a friendly alliance with gm that would preserve jaguar's independence, but no deal has been announced. ford, on the other hand, has said it's willing to bid for all of jaguar, despite the objections of jaguar chairman sir john egan. analysts continued to speculate late last week that ford may try to force the issue by calling for a special shareholder's meeting and urging that the government and jaguar holders remove the barriers to a full bidding contest before december 1990. but a ford spokeswoman in dearborn said friday the company hasn't requested such a meeting yet. individuals close to the situation believe ford officials will seek a meeting this week with sir john to outline their proposal for a full bid. any discussions with ford could postpone the jaguar-gm deal, headed for completion within the next two weeks. the gm agreement is expected to retain jaguar's independence by involving an eventual 30% stake for the u.s. auto giant as well as joint manufacturing and marketing ventures. jaguar and gm hope to win jaguar shareholders approval for the accord partly by structuring it in a way that wouldn't preclude a full ford bid once the golden share expires. "there's either a minority {stake} package capable of getting jaguar shareholder approval or there isn't," said one knowledgeable individual. "if there isn't, {the deal} won't be put forward" to shareholders. union sentiment also could influence shareholder reaction to a jaguar-gm accord. gm's u.k. unit holds crucial talks today with union officials about its consideration of an ellesmere port site for its first major engine plant in britain. one auto-industry union leader said, "if they try to build it somewhere else {in europe} besides the u.k., they are going to be in big trouble" with unionists over any jaguar deal.
bruce w. wilkinson, president and chief executive officer, was named to the additional post of chairman of this architectural and design services concern. mr. wilkinson, 45 years old, succeeds thomas a. bullock, 66, who is retiring as chairman but will continue as a director and chairman of the executive committee.
leaseway transportation corp. said it will restructure $192.5 million of certain subordinated debentures to reduce its debt obligations and interest expense. the 13.25% subordinated debentures due 2002 were issued in august 1987 as part of the $690 million financing for a leveraged buy-out of the company. leaseway provides transportation services for manufacturers, distributors and retailers. leaseway said it has begun discussions with certain institutional debt holders to review the proposed private placement transaction, which would exchange the debt for new subordinated debt instruments and equity securities. specific terms are subject to review and a final agreement with debt holders, the company said. but the proposed transaction calls for an exchange of the debt for new debentures of lower face value and reduced cash interest. also, debt holders would be offered an equity position in leaseway, which in total would represent a controlling interest in the company. drexel burnham lambert inc. is the adviser on the transaction. company officials said leaseway fulfilled payment requirements of its debt obligations since the leveraged buy-out, but "our performance since the {buy-out} makes it imperative to implement actions that will further improve our cash flow."
nicaraguan president daniel ortega may have accomplished over the weekend what his u.s. antagonists have failed to do: revive a constituency for the contra rebels. lawmakers haven't publicly raised the possibility of renewing military aid to the contras, and president bush parried the question at a news conference here saturday, saying only that "if there's an all-out military offensive, that's going to change the equation 180 degrees." but mr. ortega's threat over the weekend to end a 19-month cease-fire with the rebels seeking to topple him, effectively elevated the contras as a policy priority just as they were slipping from the agendas of their most ardent supporters. senate majority leader george mitchell (d., maine) said yesterday on nbc-tv's "meet the press" that mr. ortega's threat was "a very unwise move, particularly the timing of it." the threat came during a two-day celebration in costa rica to highlight central america's progress toward democracy in the region, attended by president bush, canadian prime minister brian mulroney and 14 other western hemisphere leaders. mr. bush returned to washington saturday night. mr. ortega announced on friday that he would end the cease-fire this week in response to the periodic contra assaults against his army. saturday, he amended his remarks to say that he would continue to abide by the cease-fire if the u.s. ends its financial support for the contras. he asked that the remaining u.s. humanitarian aid be diverted to disarming and demobilizing the rebels. not only did mr. ortega's comments come in the midst of what was intended as a showcase for the region, it came as nicaragua is under special international scrutiny in anticipation of its planned february elections. outside observers are gathering in nicaragua to monitor the registration and treatment of opposition candidates. and important u.s. lawmakers must decide at the end of november if the contras are to receive the rest of the $49 million in so-called humanitarian assistance under a bipartisan agreement reached with the bush administration in march. the humanitarian assistance, which pays for supplies such as food and clothing for the rebels amassed along the nicaraguan border with honduras, replaced the military aid cut off by congress in february 1988. while few lawmakers anticipated that the humanitarian aid would be cut off next month, mr. ortega's threat practically guarantees that the humanitarian aid will be continued. senate minority leader robert dole (r., kan.) said yesterday on "meet the press": "i would hope after his {mr. ortega's} act yesterday or the day before, we'd have unanimous support for quick action on remaining humanitarian aid." sen. dole also said he hoped for unanimous support for a resolution he plans to offer tomorrow denouncing the nicaraguan leader. while renewing military aid had been considered out of the question, rejected by congress and de-emphasized by the bush administration, mr. ortega's statement provides contra supporters with the opportunity to press the administration on the issue. "the administration should now state that if the {february} election is voided by the sandinistas . . . they should call for military aid," said former assistant secretary of state elliott abrams. "in these circumstances, i think they'd win." sen. mitchell said that congressional democrats intend to honor the march agreement to give non-lethal support to the contras through the february elections, although he added that the agreement requires that the contras not initiate any military action. mr. ortega's threat to breach the cease-fire comes as u.s. officials were acknowledging that the contras have at times violated it themselves. secretary of state james baker, who accompanied president bush to costa rica, told reporters friday: "i have no reason to deny reports that some contras ambushed some sandinista soldiers." mr. baker's assistant for inter-american affairs, bernard aronson, while maintaining that the sandinistas had also broken the cease-fire, acknowledged: "it's never very clear who starts what." he added that the u.s. has cut off aid to some rebel units when it was determined that those units broke the cease-fire. in addition to undermining arguments in favor of ending contra aid, mr. ortega's remarks also played to the suspicions of some u.s. officials and conservatives outside the government that he is searching for ways to manipulate or void the february elections. administration officials traveling with president bush in costa rica interpreted mr. ortega's wavering as a sign that he isn't responding to the military attacks so much as he is searching for ways to strengthen his hand prior to the elections. mr. abrams said that mr. ortega is seeking to demobilize the contras prior to the elections to remove any pressure to hold fair elections. "my sense is what they have in mind is an excuse for clamping down on campaigning" by creating an atmosphere of a military emergency, he said.
shoney's inc. said it will report a write-off of $2.5 million, or seven cents a share, for its fourth quarter ended yesterday. the restaurant operator cited transaction costs from its 1988 recapitalization as a result of a $160 million restructuring of its bank debt. the write-off will be reported as an extraordinary item in the company's 1989 operating results. in addition, the effective interest rate on the $410 million of total remaining bank debt after the restructuring is 10.66%. the combined effect of these changes is expected to save the company about $4 million in interest expenses next year, or six cents a share. shoney's said the latest restructuring affected bank indebtedness that was incurred to finance $585 million of the company's $728 million recapitalization that took place in the company has made payments of $175 million against the original $585 million of bank debt incurred in connection with the recapitalization. these payments consisted of $54 million in scheduled payments and $121 million in prepayments, funded by $82.8 million from operating cash flow, zero-coupon subordinated debt and assets sales.
telxon corp. said its vice president for manufacturing resigned and its houston work force has been trimmed by 40 people, or about 15%. the maker of hand-held computers and computer systems said the personnel changes were needed to improve the efficiency of its manufacturing operation. the company said it hasn't named a successor to ronald bufton, the vice president who resigned. its houston work force now totals 230.
wanted: an investment that's as simple and secure as a certificate of deposit but offers a return worth getting excited about. with $150 billion of cds maturing this month, a lot of people have been scouring the financial landscape for just such an investment. in april, when many of them bought their cds, six-month certificates were yielding more than 9%; investors willing to look could find double-digit yields at some banks and thrifts. now, the nationwide average yield on a six-month cd is just under 8%, and 8.5% is about the best around. but investors looking for alternatives aren't finding it easy. yields on most fixed-income securities are lower than several months ago. and the stock market's recent gyrations are a painful reminder of the dangers there. "if you're looking for a significantly higher yield with the same level of risk as a cd, you're not going to find it," says washington financial planner dennis m. gurtz. there are, however, some alternatives that income-oriented investors should consider, investment advisers say. short-term municipal bonds, bond funds and tax-deferred annuities are some of the choices they mention -- and not just as a way to get a higher return. in particular, advisers say, investors may want to look at securities that reduce the risk that cd holders are confronting right now, of having to reinvest the proceeds of maturing short-term certificates at lower rates. a mix of cds and other holdings may make the most sense. "people should remember their money isn't all or nothing -- they don't need to be shopping for the one interest-rate-type investment and putting all their money in it," says bethesda, md., adviser karen schaeffer. here's a look at some of the alternatives: short-term municipals: investors with a heavy tax load should take out their calculators. yields on municipal bonds can be higher than after-tax yields on cds for maturities of perhaps one to five years. that's because municipal-bond interest is exempt from federal income tax -- and from state and local taxes too, for in-state investors. for an investor paying tax at a 33% rate, a seemingly puny 6% yield on a one-year muni is equivalent to a taxable 9%. rates approach 6.5% on five-year municipals. some of the more cautious cd holders might like "pre-refunded" municipals. these securities get top credit ratings because the issuers have put aside u.s. bonds that will be sold to pay off holders when the municipals are retired. "it's a no-brainer: you don't have to worry about diversification; you don't have to worry about quality," says steven j. hueglin, executive vice president of the new york bond firm of gabriele, hueglin & cashman inc. consider a "laddered" bond portfolio, with issues maturing in, say, 1992, 1993 and 1994, advises malcolm a. makin, a westerly, r.i., financial planner. the idea is to have money rolling over each year at prevailing interest rates. bond funds: bond mutual funds offer diversification and are easy to buy and sell. that makes them a reasonable option for investors who will accept some risk of price fluctuation in order to make a bet that interest rates will decline over the next year or so. buyers can look forward to double-digit annual returns if they are right. but they will have disappointing returns or even losses if interest rates rise instead. bond resale prices, and thus fund share prices, move in the opposite direction from rates. the price movements get bigger as the maturity of the securities lengthens. consider, for instance, two bond funds from vanguard group of investment cos. that were both yielding 8.6% on a recent day. the short term bond fund, with an average maturity of 2 1/2 years, would deliver a total return for one year of about 10.6% if rates drop one percentage point and a one-year return of about 6.6% if rates rise by the same amount. but, in the same circumstances, the returns would be a more extreme 14.6% and 2.6% for the vanguard bond market fund, with its 12 1/2-year average maturity. "you get equity-like returns" from bonds if you guess right on rates, says james e. wilson, a columbia, s.c., planner. if interest rates don't change, bond fund investors' returns will be about equal to the funds' current yields. deferred annuities: these insurance company contracts feature some of the same tax benefits and restrictions as non-deductible individual retirement accounts: investment gains are compounded without tax consequences until money is withdrawn, but a 10% penalty tax is imposed on withdrawals made before age 59 1/2. aimed specifically at cd holders are so-called cd-type annuities, or certificates of annuity. an interest rate is guaranteed for between one and seven years, after which holders get 30 days to choose another guarantee period or to switch to another insurer's contract without the surrender charges that are common to annuities. some current rates exceed those on cds. for instance, a cd-type annuity from north american co. for life & health insurance, chicago, offers 8.8% interest for one year or a 9% rate for two years. annuities are rarely a good idea at age 35 because of the withdrawal restrictions. but at age 55, "they may be a great deal," says mr. wilson, the columbia, s.c., planner. money market funds: that's right, money market mutual funds. the conventional wisdom is to go into money funds when rates are rising and shift out at times such as the present, when rates seem headed down. with average maturities of a month or so, money funds offer fixed share prices and floating returns that track market interest rates, with a slight lag. still, today's highest-yielding money funds may beat cds over the next year even if rates fall, says guy witman, an editor of the bond market advisor newsletter in atlanta. that's because top-yielding funds currently offer yields almost 1 1/2 percentage points above the average cd yield. mr. witman likes the dreyfus worldwide dollar money market fund, with a seven-day compound yield just under 9.5%. a new fund, its operating expenses are being temporarily subsidized by the sponsor. try combining a money fund and an intermediate-term bond fund as a low-risk bet on falling rates, suggests back bay advisors inc., a mutual fund unit of new england insurance co. if rates unexpectedly rise, the increasing return on the money fund will partly offset the lower-than-expected return from the bond fund.
falcon holding group inc. said it agreed to acquire about 54,000 subscribers from first carolina cable tv limited partnership for about $100 million, or roughly $2,000 a subscriber. the subscribers are in 52 different communities in georgia, alabama and mississippi. completion of the sale is expected early next year, falcon said. currently, falcon has about 750,000 cable-television subscribers around the nation; the company's cable-television unit reported 1988 revenue of about $100 million. in composite trading on the american stock exchange, falcon closed at $20, unchanged.
sheraton corp. and pan american world airways announced that they and two soviet partners will construct two "world-class" hotels within a mile of red square in moscow. u.s. and soviet officials hailed the joint project as a new indication of the further thaw in u.s.-soviet relations. "this is an outstanding example of how the east and the west can work together for their mutual benefit and progress," said soviet ambassador yuri dubinin, who hosted a signing ceremony for the venture's partners at the soviet embassy here. commerce secretary robert mosbacher, who attended the ceremony, called the undertaking a "historic step" in the evolution of u.s.-soviet ties. he added that it likely will have a "mulitiplier effect" in stimulating further trade between the two countries. the project will be the largest u.s.-backed joint venture to be undertaken in the soviet union in recent years. one of the hotels, to be called the sheraton moscow, will have 450 rooms and will cost an estimated $75 million to build. the six-story hotel will be on gorky street and initially will cater mostly to business travelers. it will have a russian tavern, an english pub, a discotheque and japanese and italian restaurants, according to a sheraton announcement. the hotel is scheduled to open in 1992. the second hotel, to be called the budapest hotel, is to be constructed at a site even closer to red square. details about its size and cost haven't yet been determined. sheraton, a subsidiary of itt corp., will have a 40% share in the two hotels; pan american, a subsidiary of pan am corp., will have a 10% share. the soviet owners will be mossoviet, moscow's city governing body, and aeroflot, the soviet national airline. although a finnish group has a minority interest in an already operating moscow hotel, the sheraton-pan am venture will be the first joint-venture hotels in the soviet union to have as much as 50% foreign ownership. u.s. companies account for less than 8% of the 1,000 or more soviet joint ventures that have been announced since the soviets began encouraging such undertakings in 1987. but some u.s. companies are negotiating projects that could be among the biggest ones to be launched. chevron corp., amoco corp., archer-daniels-midland co., and eastman kodak co. are among the u.s. companies known to be considering such ventures. sheraton and pan am said they are assured under the soviet joint-venture law that they can repatriate profits from their hotel venture. the sheraton moscow will charge about $140 to $150 a day for each of its rooms, and it will accept payment only in currencies that can be traded in foreign exchange markets, according to a sheraton executive. thomas plaskett, pan am's chairman, said the u.s. airline's participation is a natural outgrowth of its current arrangements with aeroflot to jointly operate nonstop new york-moscow flights. he said the rising volume of passenger traffic on this route justifies a major investment in new high-standard moscow hotels.
brush wellman inc. said its board increased the number of shares of common stock to be purchased under a previously authorized program to 3.9 million from 2.9 million. the maker of engineered materials has acquired more than 2.7 million shares under the program.
the nasdaq over-the-counter market didn't fully recover from a selling stampede, and closed down 1.2%. the effects on the market of the mostly computer-driven sell-off among exchange-listed stocks irked many market makers, who watched the nasdaq composite index tumble in sympathy with the dow jones industrial average, and then saw it get left behind in the subsequent rally. after plummeting 1.8% at one point during the day, the composite rebounded a little, but finished down 5.52, at 461.70. in contrast, the industrial average recovered almost completely from its skid and closed down 0.1%. the new york stock exchange composite was 0.4% lower for the day. as usual, the over-the-counter market's biggest technology stocks were hardest hit. microsoft, battered by profit taking in recent sessions, sank as much as 4; but it finished at 80 7/8, down 2 1/4 on volume of one million shares. mci communications, the most active issue, finished down 5/8 to 42 1/8. mci traded as low as 41 3/8 during the session. other active stocks included jaguar, whose american depositary receipts added 1/8 to 11 1/4. apple computer improved 7/8 to 47 5/8; intel slipped 1/4 to 33 1/4, and valley national corp. was up 1/8 to 15 1/8. "the market started with several strikes against it," said peter dapuzzo, head of retail equity trading at shearson lehman hutton, referring to news that the labor-management buy-out of ual corp. continued to unravel, and reports that the junk-bond market is disintegrating. but the computer-guided selling in response to those developments dealt a serious blow to the over-the-counter market, mr. dapuzzo said. even though the over-the-counter market usually doesn't fall by as much as listed stocks during program-selling blitzes, he said, "when the market does recover, the damage is done and it leaves nasdaq down more than the big board." mr. dapuzzo also complained that the sharp swings in stock prices lately is scaring away retail and foreign investors. while shearson doesn't do computer-guided program trading for its own account, the firm does execute orders for clients involved in the buying and selling of shares tied to movements in certain stock indexes, mr. dapuzzo acknowledged. the volatility inherent in program trading troubled other traders, too. they don't like the risks they are forced to assume when prices swing so drastically. market makers are supposed to keep supplies of stocks on hand to maintain orderly trading when imbalances occur. that means that on days when prices are tumbling and sellers abound they must be willing to buy shares from sellers when no one else will. in such an environment, a market maker can absorb huge losses. but the recent volatility in stock prices caused by the program trading has made some market makers less willing to soak up the stocks that are for sale. the market makers say they aren't comfortable carrying big positions in stocks because they realize prices can tumble quickly. the situation makes it harder to buy and sell shares quickly, exacerbating the rise and fall in stock prices during program-dominated trading. groused robert antolini, head of over-the-counter trading at donaldson, lufkin & jenrette: "it's making it tough for traders to make money." he said that when sell programs kick in, many traders believe that "there's no sense in sticking your nose out because you're an instant loser." kinder-care learning centers added 1/4 to 4 7/8 on 461,200 shares. lodestar group said it will make a $6-a-share offer for the remaining kinder-care learning center common stock if it acquires a majority of the company's shares in a pending rights offering by kinder-care learning center's parent, kinder-care inc. shares of kindercare inc. closed at 3 1/2, also up 1/4, on volume of 700,000. ohio casualty dropped 2 1/8 to 49 1/2. the company posted third-quarter earnings of 95 cents a share, down from $1.26 a year earlier. the company estimated that losses from hurricane hugo reduced net income by 32 cents a share in the most recent quarter. the company said losses from the oct. 17 earthquake in california haven't yet been determined, but that it provides earthquake coverage to about 1,400 properties in the stricken area. any quake-related losses will be reported in the fourth quarter, the company said. north atlantic industries jumped 1 to 5 3/4. the electronics-instruments maker is to be acquired by asset management associates for $7.25 a share. lin broadcasting slid 1 3/8 to 108 3/4, despite reporting third-quarter net of 46 cents a share, up from 39 cents the previous year. the company said the latest quarter included about $3.4 million in special legal and financial advisory costs related to mccaw cellular communications' bid for the company and lin's merger pact with bellsouth. mccaw was unchanged at 40. xl/datacomp slid 2 1/4 to 16 1/2 amid continuing concerns about the company's contract negotiations with international business machines. ibm is reviewing its entire business-partners program, and xl/datacomp confirmed earlier this month that it was in talks with the company about possible modifications to its current ibm-remarketer contract. remarketers make modifications to ibm's computer hardware and resell the products. omni capital group surged 1 3/4 to 16 1/4. the company said net rose to 38 cents a share in its fiscal-first quarter ended sept. 30, from 35 cents a shares a year ago.
the polish rat will eat well this winter. tons of delectably rotting potatoes, barley and wheat will fill damp barns across the land as thousands of farmers turn the state's buyers away. many a piglet won't be born as a result, and many a ham will never hang in a butcher shop. but with inflation raging, grain in the barn will still be a safer bet for the private farmer than money in the bank. once again, the indomitable peasant holds poland's future in his hands. until his labor can produce a profit in this dying and distorted system, even solidarity's sympathetic new government won't win him over. in coming months, emergency food aid moving in from the west will be the one buffer between a meat-hungry public and a new political calamity. factory workers on strike knocked poland's communist bosses off balance last year; this year, it was the farmers who brought them down. in june, farmers held onto meat, milk and grain, waiting for july's usual state-directed price rises. the communists froze prices instead. the farmers ran a boycott, and meat disappeared from the shops. on aug. 1, the state tore up its controls, and food prices leaped. without buffer stocks, inflation exploded. that was when the tame old peasants' party, desperate to live through the crisis, broke ranks with the communists and joined with solidarity in the east bloc's first liberated government. but by the time solidarity took office in september, the damage was done. "shortageflation," as economists have come to call it, had gone hyper. the cost of raising a pig kept bounding ahead of the return for selling one. the farmers stayed angry. they still are. at dawn on a cool day, hundreds travel to the private market in radzymin, a town not far from warsaw, hauling pigs, cattle and sacks of feed that the state's official buyers can't induce them to sell. here, they are searching for a higher price. in a crush of trucks and horse carts on the trodden field, andrzej latowski wrestles a screeching, overweight hog into the trunk of a private butcher's polish fiat. "of course it's better to sell private," he says, as the butcher trundles away. "why should anybody want to sell to them?" the young farmer makes money on the few hogs he sells here. he won't for long, because his old state sources of rye and potatoes are drying up. "there's no feed," he says. "you can't buy anything nowadays. i don't know why." edward chojnowski does. his truck is parked across the field, in a row of grain sellers. like the others, it is loaded with rye, wheat and oats in sacks labeled "asbestos. made in u.s.s.r." the farmer at the next truck shouts, "wheat! it's nice! it won't be cheaper! we sell direct!" a heavy, kerchiefed woman runs a handful through her fingers, and counts him out a pile of zlotys. "country people breed pigs," says mr. chojnowski, leaning against the back of his truck. "they can't buy feed from the state. there isn't enough. some state middlemen come to buy from me. i sell -- a little. i am waiting. i have plenty more at home." on this morning, he doesn't sell much in radzymin, either. at closing time, farmers cart out most of what they carted in. a private market like this just isn't big enough to absorb all that business. the hulk of stalinism, it seems, will not quickly crumble away. state monopolies will keep on stifling trade, "free" prices or not, until something else replaces them. polish agriculture will need a whole private network of procurement, processing and distribution -- plus a new manufacturing industry to supply it with tractors, pesticides, fertilizers and feed. the communists spent 40 years working to ensure that no such capitalistic structures ever arose here. building them now will require undergirding from the west, and removal of political deadwood, a job that solidarity has barely started. but polish agriculture does possess one great asset already: the private farmer. "we are dealing with real entrepreneurs," says antoni leopold, an economist who advises rural solidarity, the union's countryside offshoot. "there are a lot of them, and they have property." polish peasants, spurning the collectivizers, were once a source of shame to orthodox communists. now, among communist reformers, they are objects of envy. food is the reformer's top priority, the key to popular support. as the chinese have shown and the soviets are learning, family farms thrive where collectives fail. ownership, it seems, is the best fertilizer. the poles have had it all along. poland's 2.7 million small private farms cover 76% of its arable land. on it, a quarter of the country's 39 million people produce three-quarters of its grain, beef, eggs and milk, and nine-tenths of its fruit, vegetables and potatoes. like the roman catholic church, the polish peasant is a pillar of the nation. try as they might, the communists could neither replace nor break him. and they did try. a few miles past radzymin, a dirt road narrows to a track of sand and leads into zalubice, a village of tumbledown farms. czeslaw pyszkiewicz owns 30 acres in 14 scattered scraps. he grows rye and potatoes for a few hens, five cows and 25 piglets. in patched pants and torn shoes, he stands in his barnyard eyeing the ground with a look both helpless and sardonic. "it's bad soil," he says. until 1963, it was good soil. then the state put in a reservoir to supply the area with drinking water. farmers lay down before the bulldozers. their protest was ignored. the dam caused the water level to drop in zalubice. mr pyszkiewicz smiles and his brow furrows. he expected as much. in his lifetime, 47 years, the communists brought electricity to his village and piped in drinking water from the reservoir. no phones. no gas. "we wanted them to build a road here," he says. "they started, and then abandoned it." a tractor, his only mechanized equipment, stands in front of the pigsty. "it's russian. good for nothing. parts are a tragedy. even if i had a lot of money, i couldn't buy what i need." the farmer can say the same for coal, cement, saw blades. in poland, only 4% of all investment goes toward making things farmers want; in the west, it is closer to 20%. the few big state farms take first crack at what does get made. they use 60% more fertilizer per acre, twice the high-grade feed. yet their best boast is that they produce 32% of polish pork. "i've heard from friends that state farms are subsidized," mr. pyszkiewicz says as his wife, wieslawa, sets some chairs out in the sun. "we have one near here. there is a lot of waste. a private farmer never wastes anything." the state quit shoving peasants onto its subsidized farms over 30 years ago. but it never did let up on the pressure. until recently, a farmer with no heir had to will the state his land to collect his pension. the pension's size still depends on how much produce he sells the state. his allotment of materials also did, until the state couldn't hold up its end of that bargain. yet the state alone sells seeds and machines. when supplies are short, it often hands them over only in exchange for milk or grain. a private farmer in poland is free to buy and sell land, hire help, decide what to grow and how to grow it. he is free to invest in chickens, and to fail for lack of chicken wire. he has plenty of freedom -- but no choices. "i'm on my own land," mr. pyszkiewicz says. "i don't have to listen to what anybody tells me to do." "sometimes," says his wife, "we're happy about that." by starving the peasant, the communists have starved poland. villages like zalubice exist in a desert of poor schools and few doctors. farm income is 15% below the average. the young leave, especially girls who won't milk cows by hand. some men stay, their best friend a bottle of vodka, but two million acres have gone fallow. without machines, good farms can't get bigger. so the potato crop, once 47 million tons, is down to 35 million. meat consumption is at 1979's level, pork production at 1973's, milk output at 1960's. if a food crisis undid the communists, a food revolution will make solidarity. the potential is displayed along every road into warsaw: row upon row of greenhouses, stretching out behind modern mansions that trumpet their owners' wealth. vegetables are abundant and full of flavor in poland, the pickles and sauerkraut sublime, the state monopolies long broken. grain, milk and meat come next. a private challenge to the monolithic tractor industry will take more time and money than poland can spare, although a smokehouse or a local dairy can spring up fast. poland makes no machinery for a plant on that scale. solidarity wants it from the west. maria stolzman, one of its farm experts, lays it on the line: "the world bank will be brought in to help us destroy the old system." felix siemienas is destroying it now. he packs pork. a law went on the books in january that let him smoke bacon without breeding pigs. he cashed in. poland is short on enterprises, not enterprise. "i pay a lot to the farmer and five times the state salary to my employees," he says. he is in warsaw to open a shop. "i hire transportation, and my customers have fresh cold cuts every day. i don't subsidize anyone. everyone around me lives well. yes, my prices are high. if nobody buys, i bring my prices down. that's the rule. that's the market." mr. siemienas is making a fortune -- $10,000 a month, he says. he has bought some trendy western clothes, and a green mercedes with an american flag in the window. but the meat-processing machines he picked up are 50 years old. "i don't want expensive machines. if the situation changes, i'll get stuck with them." that's politics. by taking power in a deal with the peasant party's onetime communist stooges, solidarity has spooked the rural entrepreneur. rural solidarity objected, to no avail, when solidarity leader lech walesa accepted the peasants' support. it objected again in september when prime minister tadeusz mazowiecki reluctantly named a peasant party man as his agriculture minister. both the peasants and rural solidarity are forming new political parties for farmers. the peasants can make a credible case, against solidarity, that hell-bent reform will drive millions from the land. next spring, the two will battle in local elections. but until then, and probably long afterward, the communists' apparat of obstruction -- from the head of the dairy co-op to the village bank manager -- will stay planted in the polish countryside. "we know how to get from capitalism to socialism," sergiusz niciporuk is saying one afternoon. "we don't know how to get from socialism to capitalism." he farms 12 acres in grabowiec, two miles from the soviet border in one of poland's poorest places. now he is mounting the steps of a stucco building in a nearby village, on a visit to the communist administrator, the "naczelnik." "many people in poland hope this government will break down," says mr. niciporuk, who belongs to the local council and to rural solidarity. "that's what the naczelnik counts on. he is our most dangerous enemy. every time he sees me, he gets very nervous." the farmer barges into the naczelnik's office. a thin man in a gray suit looks up from a newspaper. mr. niciporuk sits. anatol pawlowski's leg begins jiggling beneath his desk. "solidarity doesn't care for the good of this region," he says after a few pleasantries. "they want to turn everything upside down in a week. mr. niciporuk here wants 60 acres used at the moment by a state farm. he can't guarantee that he can use it any better." "i am ready at any moment to compete with a state farm." the naczelnik averts his eyes. "what have you got? not even a tractor. and you want to make wicker baskets, too." "i can do five things at once -- to be a businessman." "big business," mr. pawlowski snorts in english. the farmer stands to go. the naczelnik stands, too. "i care very much for this post," he says. "eight years i've had it. a cultural center has been built, shops. suddenly, i am not a comfortable man for solidarity. i have accomplished too much. they want to do more. i wish them all the best!" the farmer leaves. and the naczelnik shuts his door.
mobil corp. is preparing to slash the size of its work force in the u.s., possibly as soon as next month, say individuals familiar with the company's strategy. the size of the cuts isn't known, but they'll be centered in the exploration and production division, which is responsible for locating oil reserves, drilling wells and pumping crude oil and natural gas. employees haven't yet been notified. sources said that meetings to discuss the staff reductions have been scheduled for friday at mobil offices in new orleans and denver. this would be a second round of cuts by mobil, which along with other oil producers and refiners reduced its work force by 15% to 20% during the mid-1980s as part of an industrywide shakeout. mobil's latest move could signal the beginning of further reductions by other oil companies in their domestic oil-producing operations. in yesterday's third-quarter earnings report, the company alluded to a $40 million provision for restructuring costs involving u.s. exploration and production operations. the report says that "the restructuring will take place over a two-year period and will principally involve the transfer and termination of employees in our u.s. operations." a company spokesman, reached at his home last night, would only say that there will be a public announcement of the reduction program by the end of the week. most oil companies, including mobil, have been reporting lower third-quarter earnings, largely as a result of lower earnings from chemicals as well as refining and marketing businesses. individuals familiar with mobil's strategy say that mobil is reducing its u.s. work force because of declining u.s. output. yesterday, mobil said domestic exploration and production operations had a $16 million loss in the third quarter, while comparable foreign operations earned $234 million. industrywide, oil production in this country fell by 500,000 barrels a day to 7.7 million barrels in the first eight months of this year. daily output is expected to decline by at least another 500,000 barrels next year. some mobil executives were dismayed that a reference to the cutbacks was included in the earnings report before workers were notified. one mobil executive said that the $40 million charge related to the action indicates "a substantial" number of people will be involved. some will likely be offered severance packages while others will be transferred to overseas operations.
murata mfg. co. said it is establishing a subsidiary in britain to produce electric parts, including ceramic condensers. the tokyo maker of ceramic capacitors said it purchased a plant in plymouth. the company didn't disclose a purchase price or capitalization figures. murata said, however, it will invest about 1.4 billion yen ($9.9 million) in the new company. production is slated to begin in april. the company, which has a european foothold, murata europe management g.m.b. h. in germany, said the latest venture is designed to meet demand for electric parts in european community countries ahead of the creation of the unified market by the end of 1992. murata expects sales at the unit of about 1.5 billion yen in the first year.
alberta energy co., calgary, said it filed a preliminary prospectus for an offering of common shares. the natural resources development concern said proceeds will be used to repay long-term debt, which stood at 598 million canadian dollars (us$510.6 million) at the end of 1988. the company plans to raise between c$75 million and c$100 million from the offering, according to a spokeswoman at richardson greenshields of canada ltd., lead underwriter. the shares will be priced in early november, she said.
savings and loans reject blacks for mortgage loans twice as often as they reject whites, the office of thrift supervision said. but that doesn't necessarily mean thrifts are discriminating against blacks, the agency said. the office, an arm of the treasury, said it doesn't have data on the financial position of applicants and thus can't determine why blacks are rejected more often. nevertheless, on capitol hill, where the information was released yesterday at a senate banking subcommittee hearing, lawmakers said they are worried that financial institutions are routinely discriminating against minorities. they asked regulators to suggest new ways to force banks and thrifts to comply with anti-discrimination laws. sen. alan dixon (d, ill.), chairman of the subcommittee on consumer and regulatory affairs, said, "i'm not a statistician. but when blacks are getting their loan applications rejected twice as often as whites -- and in some cities, it is three and four times as often -- i conclude that discrimination is part of the problem." james grohl, a spokesman for the u.s. league of savings institutions, said, "the data is a red flag, but lacking the financial data you can't make a case that discrimination is widespread." the trade group official added: "certainly the federal government should take a hard look at it." sen. dixon held the hearing to follow up on a provision in the savings and loan bailout bill that required regulators to report on evidence of discimination in mortgage lending. the legislation also requires broad new disclosures of the race, sex and income level of borrowers, but that information won't be gathered in new studies for several months at least. the federal reserve said its studies in recent years, which adjust for income differences and other variables, showed that blacks received fewer home mortgages from banks and thrifts than whites. but john laware, a fed governor, told the subcommittee the evidence is mixed and that the fed's believes the vast majority of banks aren't discriminating. for instance, he noted, the fed studies have shown that blacks receive more home improvement loans than whites. several lawmakers were angered that the bank and thrift regulators generally said they have been too busy handling the record number of bank and thrift failures in the past few years to put much energy into investigating possible discrimination. "we would be the first to admit that we have not devoted the necessary amount of emphasis over the past several years" to developing examinations for discrimination, said jonathan fiechter, a top official of the office of thrift supervision. "if we've got folks out there who are being turned away in the mortgage market improperly and unfairly," said sen. donald riegle (d., mich.), chairman of the banking committee, "then that is a matter that needs remedy now, not six months from now, or six years from now, or 26 years from now." officials of the federal deposit insurance corp. and the office of the comptroller of the currency said they have punished only a few banks for violations of anti-discrimination laws. the fdic said it has issued five citations to banks over the past three years for discriminatory practices. the comptroller's office said it found no indications of illegal discrimination in 3,437 examinations of banks since april 1987. the comptroller's office also said that of 37,000 complaints it received since january 1987, only 16 alleged racial discrimination in real estate lending. the agency investigated the complaints but no violations were cited. thrift regulators didn't give any figures on their enforcement actions. mr. fiechter said that among the possibilities being considered by regulators to fight discrimination is the use of "testers" -- government investigators who would pose as home buyers. the department of housing and urban development has used testers to investigate discrimination in rental housing. using testers could be controversial with financial institutions, but mr. grohl said the u.s. league of savings institutions hadn't yet taken any position on the matter.
homestake mining co., san francisco, blamed the continued slump in gold prices for an 83% plunge in third-quarter net income to $2 million, or two cents a share, from $11.2 million, or 12 cents a share, a year earlier. revenue rose 5% to $110.4 million from $105.4 million. in new york stock exchange composite trading, homestake closed at $15.25, down 25 cents. "a significant increase in gold sales to 248,279 ounces for the quarter from 188,726 in the third quarter of 1988 was more than offset by the continued decline in average gold price realization to $367 from $429 per ounce," the company said. for the nine months, the mining company posted a 40% drop in profit to $30.1 million, or 31 cents a share, from $50.6 million, or 52 cents a share, on a 6% rise in revenue to $323.2 million from $305.7 million.
tandy corp. said it won't join u.s. memories, the group that seeks to battle the japanese in the market for computer memory chips. tandy's decision is a second setback for u.s. memories. last month, apple computer inc. said that it wouldn't invest in the group. apple said that its money would be better spent in areas such as research and development. u.s. memories is seeking major investors to back its attempt to crack the $10 billion market for dynamic random access memory chips, a market dominated by the japanese. those chips were in dire shortage last year, hurting many u.s. computer companies that couldn't get sufficient japanese-supplied chips. tandy said its experience during the shortage didn't merit the $5 million to $50 million investment u.s. memories is seeking from each investor. "at this time, we elected not to get involved because we have been able to satisfy our need {for drams} from the market as a rule," said ed juge, tandy's director of market planning. sanford kane, u.s. memories president, said the decision was "disappointing," but doesn't presage u.s. memories' failure. "i would like to have had them," he said. but "they weren't on my list of companies who were critical to be a part of it." mr. kane became president and chief executive officer of u.s. memories last june, when the group was formed by seven electronics companies: advanced micro devices inc., digital equipment corp.; hewlett-packard co.; intel corp.; international business machines corp.; lsi logic corp. and national semiconductor corp. mr. kane said he expects two or three major corporations to announce their participation in u.s. memories soon after the group finishes a business plan, probably late this week. u.s. memories needs a catalyst, he said, to inspire others to join. but so far, most potential participants haven't decided. sun microsystems inc. said it's still actively evaluating u.s. memories and plans to meet with u.s. memories representatives later this week. american telephone & telegraph co. said it was waiting to see u.s. memories' business plan. personal-computer maker ast research inc. said it is still studying the situation. a compaq computer corp. spokeswoman said that the company hasn't made a decision yet, although "it isn't under active consideration."
in a startling turnabout, members of the senate intelligence committee are complaining that someone in the executive branch is leaking on them. david boren, the intelligence committee chairman, is upset that someone leaked a letter to the committee from the reagan administration suggesting that the u.s. would undertake to warn panamanian thug manuel noriega if it got wind of an impending coup that might result in his assassination. with due respect to "highly classified correspondence" and other buzzwords, the leakers are performing a public service. if the cia has become a protection service for mr. noriega, the american people ought to know. what went wrong in panama is a fitting subject for public and congressional inquiry. naturally, senator boren and his committee would like free rein to blame the executive branch while stamping "top secret" on their own complicity. but there's no danger of exposing sources and methods in disclosing the debate running up and down pennsylvania avenue. and if congress is going to assume authority to micromanage foreign policy, it's going to have to take some of the responsibility too. the president of the united states urged the panamanian armed forces to move against mr. noriega. when they did, his commanders didn't have the initiative to do more than block a couple of roads. the executive branch bears the first responsibility for timidity. but what kind of initiative can you expect given the climate set by congress? for example, what exactly did the cia tell major giroldi and his fellow coup plotters about u.s. laws and executive orders on assassinations? what part did u.s. warnings play in the major's unwillingness to pull the trigger when he had general noriega in custody, but was under attack by pro-noriega troops? mr. noriega didn't suffer from any hesitation once he had the pistol. maybe we need a cia version of the miranda warning: you have the right to conceal your coup intentions, because we may rat on you. or maybe a surgeon general's warning: confiding in the united states may be fatal. cia chief william webster, hardly a washington malcontent, got the debate started last week by noting that the executive order banning assassinations had contributed to u.s. paralysis during the coup. the cia's deputy director of operations, richard stoltz, tried to smooth things over a few days later, but instead simply underlined mr. webster's point. "the interpretation" of the executive order, mr. stoltz said, "and the way in which the various committees have over time interpreted it, has led in my view to a proper caution on the part of operators, including me." in other words, congress won't let the cia do much of anything anymore, and that's fine with the cia. the pay's the same, and the duty's lighter. and of course, doing anything that might be second-guessed by congress carries heavy penalties. witness the walsh prosecution of ollie north. the intelligence committee's ranking republican, senator william cohen, joined with senator george mitchell to write a best seller about iran-contra, deploring "men of zeal." no doubt many people in the cia, the pentagon and the national security council have read it. what kind of initiative should anyone expect from people out on the line who've read all this and know what can happen if they fail? who wants to end up as the protagonist in a bill cohen morality play? the order against assassinations is another artifact of the same congressional mind-set, a product of the 1970s vietnam syndrome against any executive action. president bush would do himself and the country a favor by rescinding the order as an ambiguous intrusion on his ability to defend america's national security. there are of course good reasons the u.s. shouldn't get into the assassination business, but rescinding the executive order is not the same thing as saying the u.s. should start passing out exploding cigars. the world being the nasty place it is, we want presidents to have the freedom to order operations in which someone might get killed. in such situations, you cannot write rules in advance, you can only make sure the president takes the responsibility. the executive order and the reported agreements with the intelligence committee are neither sensible nor moral. as it now stands, the u.s. can bomb tripoli, but can't "assassinate" colonel gadhafi. it can send a fighter squadron to strafe terrorist hideouts in the bekaa valley, but can't shoot abu nidal. both the assassination order and the quality of debate in washington are telling the world that the only way the u.s. will kill a madman is by making sure we take some innocent civilians with him.
dana corp. said its third-quarter net income fell 27% to $29.6 million, or 72 cents a share, from $40.7 million, or $1 a share, a year earlier. sales dropped 4% to $1.12 billion from $1.17 billion. the company, which supplies transmissions and other drive-train parts to auto makers, said about half the earnings drop came from the "virtual collapse" of the venezuelan auto industry. the venezuelan currency plummeted this year, making it difficult for auto makers there to afford imported parts. dana also said it was hurt by slumping u.s. truck sales and by a strike at a parts supplier. the company, based in toledo, ohio, had said it expected reduced third-quarter profit. mary anne sudol, an analyst at fitch investors in new york, said automotive suppliers were reporting lower profit almost "across the board." southwood j. morcott, dana's president, said the company's decision to approve its normal fourth-quarter dividend indicated its underlying strength.
gaf, part iii is scheduled to begin today. after two mistrials, the stakes in the stock manipulation trial of gaf corp. and its vice chairman, james t. sherwin, have changed considerably. the first two gaf trials were watched closely on wall street because they were considered to be important tests of the government's ability to convince a jury of allegations stemming from its insider-trading investigations. in an eight-count indictment, the government charged gaf, a wayne, n.j., chemical maker, and mr. sherwin with illegally attempting to manipulate the common stock of union carbide corp. in advance of gaf's planned sale of a large block of the stock in 1986. the government's credibility in the gaf case depended heavily on its star witness, boyd l. jefferies, the former los angeles brokerage chief who was implicated by former arbitrager ivan boesky, and then pointed the finger at mr. sherwin, takeover speculator salim b. lewis and corporate raider paul bilzerian. the gaf trials were viewed as previews of the government's strength in its cases against mr. lewis and mr. bilzerian. mr. jefferies's performance as a witness was expected to affect his sentencing. but gaf's bellwether role was short-lived. the first gaf trial ended in a mistrial after four weeks when u.s. district judge mary johnson lowe found that a prosecutor improperly, but unintentionally, withheld a document. after 93 hours of deliberation, the jurors in the second trial said they were hopelessly deadlocked, and another mistrial was declared on march 22. meanwhile, a federal jury found mr. bilzerian guilty on securities fraud and other charges in june. a month later, mr. jefferies was spared a jail term by a federal judge who praised him for helping the government. in august, mr. lewis pleaded guilty to three felony counts. nevertheless, the stakes are still high for the players directly involved in the gaf case. the mistrials have left the reputations of gaf, mr. sherwin and gaf chairman samuel heyman in limbo. for mr. sherwin, a conviction could carry penalties of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine on each count. gaf faces potential fines of $500,000 for each count. individuals familiar with the case said that throughout september, defense attorneys were talking with the government in an effort to prevent a trial, but by the end of the month the talks had ended. there is much speculation among attorneys not involved that the strategy of gaf's attorney, arthur liman, and mr. sherwin's counsel, stephen kaufman, will include testimony by mr. sherwin or mr. heyman. neither testified at the previous trials. for now, defense attorneys are tight-lipped about their plans. max gitter, another gaf defense attorney, said yesterday, "as we go in for the third time, yogi berra's famous line is apt: `it's deja vu all over again. '" dalkon shield claimants hope to stop reorganization-plan appeal. attorneys for more than 18,000 women who claim injuries from the dalkon shield contraceptive device have asked the u.s. supreme court to refuse to hear an appeal of the bankruptcy-law reorganization plan for a.h. robins co., which manufactured the device. the dispute pits two groups of claimants against each other. baltimore attorney michael a. pretl and 17 other attorneys representing 18,136 claimants in the u.s. and abroad argue that the appeal would delay -- and perhaps even destroy -- a $2.38 billion settlement fund that is the centerpiece of the reorganization plan. the bankruptcy-court reorganization is being challenged before the supreme court by a dissident group of claimants because it places a cap on the total amount of money available to settle claims. it also bars future suits against robins company officials, members of the robins family and robins's former insurer, aetna life & casualty co. the latter provision is "legally unprecedented," said alan b. morrison, a public interest lawyer in washington, d.c., who is challenging the plan on behalf of 900 claimants. more than 100,000 claims against robins are pending. the company made and marketed the dalkon shield in the early 1970s amid mounting evidence that it could cause serious injuries. robins has been in proceedings under chapter 11 of the u.s. bankruptcy code since august 1985; such proceedings give it protection from creditor lawsuits while it works out a plan for paying its debts. american home products corp. wants to acquire robins, but only if all legal challenges to the plan are exhausted. in a brief filed with the supreme court last week, mr. pretl criticizes the appeal for raising "abstract" and "theoretical" legal issues, while jeopardizing the proposed reorganization and the settlement payments to claimants. the supreme court is scheduled to consider the case nov. 3 and may issue a decision as early as nov. 6. jury`s criminal conviction under superfund law is a first. charles a. donohoo, sole proprieter of a louisville, ky., demolition company, was found guilty of violating the superfund law as well as the clean air act. criminal convictions under the federal superfund law are rare, and the decision is the first jury verdict in such a case. under superfund, those who owned, generated or transported hazardous waste are liable for its cleanup, regardless of whether their actions were legal at the time. environmental lawyers say virtually all of the superfund cases to date have involved civil penalties designed to insure cleanup of past polluting activities. but superfund also contains a criminal provision concerning the release of toxic substances into the environment. in 1986 congress strengthened the penalty by making it a felony. mr. donohoo was convicted in louisville late last month of violating superfund by failing to report the release of asbestos into the environment from a building he was demolishing. he was also convicted of failing to properly remove asbestos from the building, a violation of the clean air act. the government sought a criminal penalty because "no cleanup is possible here. once {asbestos} is released into the environment, it can lodge anywhere," says richard a. dennis, the assistant u.s. attorney who prosecuted the case. mr. donohoo is scheduled to be sentenced dec. 11. his lawyer could not be reached for comment. mr. donohoo faces as much as three years in prison and a $250,000 fine for the superfund conviction and as much as one year in prison and a $100,000 fine for the violation of the clean air act. ted bundy's lawyers switch to victims' side in death-sentence case. wilmer, cutler & pickering, the washington, d.c., law firm that spent over $1 million fighting the execution of mass-murderer ted bundy -- who eventually was executed -- has taken on another death penalty case before the supreme court, this time on the side of the family of four murder victims in arkansas. the law firm has filed a friend-of-the-court brief jointly with the washington legal foundation, a conservative legal group. the key issue in the case, which the law firm is handling without a fee, or pro bono, is whether a person sentenced to death can voluntarily waive his rights of appellate review. the murderer, ronald gene simmons, was convicted of killing 14 people. another murderer on death row has appealed mr. simmons's death sentence in a "next friend" capacity. wilmer cutler's brief argues that there is no mandatory appellate review of capital sentences and that the inmate who filed the appeal lacks proper standing. p.j. mode, wilmer cutler's managing partner, says the trial team that represented mr. bundy was asked by the firm's pro bono committee whether the new case posed a conflict and that no objections were raised. the coupling of the law firm and the washington legal foundation is odd also, because wilmer cutler was one of the firms singled out for criticism two years ago by the conservative legal group for displaying a liberal bias in its pro bono work. "we give them a lot of credit for taking this case," says wlf's alan slobodin. the case of the fake dalis: in federal court in manhattan, three defendants pleaded guilty to charges of fraud in connection with the sale of fake salvador dali lithographs. james burke and larry evans, formerly owners of the now-defunct barclay gallery, and prudence clark, a barclay sales representative, were charged with conducting high-pressure telephone sales in which they misrepresented cheap copies of dali artwork as signed, limited-edition lithographs. the posters were sold for $1,300 to $6,000, although the government says they had a value of only $53 to $200 apiece. henry pitman, the assistant u.s. attorney handling the case, said about 1,000 customers were defrauded and that barclay's total proceeds from the sales were $3.4 million. attorneys for messrs. burke and evans and ms. clarke said that although their clients admitted to making some misrepresentations in the sales, they had believed that the works were authorized by mr. dali, who died in january. the posters were printed on paper pre-signed by mr. dali, the attorneys said.
cummins engine co., columbus, ind., hurt by a drop in engine orders from heavy-truck makers, reported a third-quarter loss of $39.7 million, or $4.12 a share, on essentially flat sales of $807.6 million. in the year-earlier period, the maker of diesel engines and parts had a narrower deficit of $17.6 million, or $1.84 a share, with sales of $808.3 million. a spokeswoman said shipments of truck engines, which provide a higher margin than most of the company's other products, declined 16% from a year earlier. although cummins's stock stumbled last month after the company projected a "substantial" third-period loss, the stock also fell $1.125 in composite new york stock exchange trading yesterday, to $51.75. it traded as high as $64 a month ago, before the loss projection. for the nine months, the latest loss trimmed net income to $3.6 million, which after payment of preferred dividends represented a 31-cent loss a common share. the year-before loss was $8.4 million, or $1.36 a common share.
cms enhancements inc. said it estimates that sales and earnings for the fiscal first quarter ended sept. 30 fell somewhat from the year-earlier period. jim farooquee, chief executive officer of the tustin, calif., computer accessories supplier, said he was "comfortable" with analysts' expectations that cms would earn between six cents and eight cents a share on revenue of about $42 million. a year earlier, cms posted profit of $1.1 million, or 13 cents a share, on sales of $48 million. this time, there are 30% more shares outstanding. mr. farooquee attributed the decline to an industrywide softening of demand for computer enhancement products.
the justice department has revised certain internal guidelines and clarified others in a move that could restrict the use of criminal racketeering charges against white-collar defendants. the most significant changes in department policy are new requirements that federal prosecutors avoid disrupting "the normal business functions" of companies charged under the racketeering law, a senior department official said. another important revision of department policy is a new guideline warning prosecutors "not to take steps that would harm innocent third parties" in a case brought under the racketeering law, the official, david runkel, said. the department distributed the revisions and clarifications to u.s. attorneys around the country this summer as part of a routine process of updating prosecutorial guidelines, mr. runkel said. the changes apply to prosecutions brought under the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations law. under that law, defendants who allegedly commit a pattern of crimes by means of a "criminal enterprise" may be charged with racketeering and forced to forfeit the proceeds of the enterprise. the rico law has come under criticism from some defendants and defense lawyers. they argue that the rights of rico defendants and third parties not named in rico indictments have been unfairly damaged. the department's most significant clarification of existing rico policy is a directive to prosecutors that they should seek to seize assets from defendants "in proportion" to the nature of the alleged offense, mr. runkel said. "that means that if the offense deals with one part of the business, you don't attempt to seize the whole business; you attempt to seize assets related to the crime," he explained. in general, the thrust of the department's directive is to encourage prosecutors to limit pretrial asset seizures if there are less intrusive means of protecting assets the government may subsequently be able to seize after a conviction, mr. runkel said.
as helen boehm, who owns an art porcelain company, sipped her luncheon cocktail, she reeled off the names of a few pals -- prince charles, princess diana, sarah ferguson, john kluge, milton petrie. then, flashing a diamond ring as big as the ritz ("my day diamond, darling"), she told her two companions that she is on the "board" of the vatican museum in rome. as it turns out, the board has a lot of important members, including winton blount (former postmaster general of the u.s.), mrs. henry gaisman (widow of the inventor of auto-strop razor) and vincent murphy (an investment banker at merrill lynch & co.) but mrs. boehm didn't mention any of them. "helen boehm has a way with names," says james revson, a gossip columnist for newsday (and son of joseph revson, a founder of revlon). like which are droppable and which are not. with the fall social season well under way, name-droppers are out in force, trying to impress their betters and sometimes put down their lessers. but the truth is that almost everyone, from real-estate agents to city fathers, name-drops; and a surprising number of people have an ancient uncle who claims he lived next door to the cartoonist who did the katzenjammer kids. (in case you have forgotten, his name was rudolph dirks.) "name-dropping is pervasive and getting more so as society becomes more complex and alienating," says herbert freudenberger, a new york psychoanalyst, with a high-powered clientele. "it can be an avenue of entrance to a certain sector of society. . . . it provides some people a needed sense of affiliation and can help open up a conversation with someone you don't know." like the long island matron in the theater district the other day who swore to a stranger that she once met liza minnelli. "i was having a drink in sardi's, when all of a sudden i saw a woman's backside coming up the steps on the second floor and she was wearing sequined slacks. i knew it was someone important, so i followed her into the ladies room and sure enough, it was liza. so i said, `hello. ' and she said, `hello. ' can you imagine? liza said hello to me." some people must drop names -- call it an irresistible impulse. "they can't help talking about the big important people they know, even if they don't really know them," says dr. freudenberger. beauregard houston-montgomery, a new york writer who changed his name from william stretch in 1980, is an inveterate name-dropper. "i do it innately and pathologically, and while it may occasionally get me into trouble, it's also gotten me access to parties and society," he says. name-dropping recently helped mr. houston-montgomery crash a party fame magazine threw for 100 of the 2,809 people mentioned in the diaries of the late andy warhol. "i guess i might have asked beauregard to leave, but he drops so many good names, we decided to let him stay," says steven greenberg, publisher of fame. "after all, warhol was the ultimate namedropper, dropping five a day in his diaries. and beauregard was mentioned twice -- although very briefly and in passing." mr. houston-montgomery says that at the party he waved to malcolm forbes, publisher of forbes magazine ("we've been in the columns together"), mary boone, a new york art dealer ("i think she knows me, but i'm not sure ") and bridget fonda, the actress ("she knows me, but we're not really the best of friends"). mr. revson, the gossip columnist, says there are people who actually plan whose names they are going to drop before attending a party. these droppers don't flaunt only their friendships with the trumps, brooke astor or georgette mosbacher. "they even drop semi-obscure names like wolfgang flottl, whom everybody these days apparently has heard of but no one really knows," says mr. revson. "it's the one-upsmanship of name-dropping that counts." but name-dropping has other benefits, often civic. in the name of civic pride and from the desire to nullify a negative image, some city promoters seek to link their municipality with the most recognizable names the city has to offer. take cleveland. it has gotten a bad rep because its once heavily polluted cuyahoga river caught fire, because former mayor ralph perk set his hair on fire with an acetylene torch and because its proposed rock 'n' roll hall of fame was recently refused an urban-development grant. some people call it "the mistake on the lake" -- lake erie, that is. "it helps to point out how many important people came through cleveland on their way to the top," says george miller, executive director of the new cleveland campaign, a nonprofit organization devoted to citing the city's strengths. mr. miller notes that actor paul newman's family owned a sporting-goods store in cleveland, that the late actress margaret hamilton, who played the bad witch in "the wizard of oz," once ran a nursery school in cleveland and that comedian bob hope's father, a stonemason, once worked on a church next to severence hall, cleveland's main concert hall. "power names like that don't hurt the city's reputation," mr. miller says. in hollywood, an average family can gain cachet from moving into a home vacated by the famous or near famous. "why we even just sold a three-bedroom house in van nuys and were able to keep the price firm in a weak real-estate market by noting that the original lone ranger lived there," says david rambo, a sales associate with jon douglas co., a los angeles real-estate agency. "most people can't even remember his name." (it is john hart.) mr. rambo says that a 3.2-acre property overlooking the san fernando valley is priced at $4 million because the late actor erroll flynn once lived there. "if flynn hadn't lived there, the property might have been priced $1 million lower," says mr. rambo, noting that flynn's house has been bulldozed, and only the swimming pool remains. press agents and public-relations practitioners are notorious name-droppers. and some even do it with malice aforethought. len kessler, a financial publicist in new york, sometimes uses it to get the attention of journalists who try to avoid him. he says that when dan dorfman, a financial columnist with usa today, hasn't returned his phone calls, he leaves messages with mr. dorfman's office saying that he has an important story on donald trump, meshulam riklis or marvin davis. he admits he has no story on any of them on these occasions. "but it does get him to return my calls, and it makes me feel better for the times he's given me the brushoff," mr. kessler says. there are, of course, obvious dangers to blatant, unsubstantiated name-dropping. jeffry thal, a publicity agent for the lantz office in los angeles, warns that dropping the wrong name labels the dropper as a fake and a fraud. "get caught and you're dead in the water," says mr. thal. mr. thal says that elizabeth taylor, a client, "hates being called `liz. '. . . if directors or producers phone me and say they know `liz, ' i know they've never met her. she prefers `elizabeth. '" in new york society, pat buckley, the very social wife of author william buckley, has the nicknames "mrs. buckles" and "patsy." and her husband sometimes calls her "ducky." "but call her `patty, ' and it's a sure giveaway you're not in her circle, because she doesn't use that name," says joan kron, editor-in-chief of avenue magazine, a monthly publication sent to all the right names. john spencer churchill, a nephew of the late sir winston churchill, former prime minister of great britain, isn't that impressed with most name-droppers he meets. that's because they only drop "mere names," says mr. churchill. currently writing his memoirs, mr. churchill, an artist, tells how tycoons such as the late jean paul getty, the oil billionnaire, were, in fact, known only by one initial, their last. "when you're at the club, you ask whether they've spoken to `g.' now they know who you mean and you know who you mean. but no one else does. now that's name-dropping, if you know what i mean."
program trading on the new york stock exchange in september rose to its highest recorded level as a percentage of total monthly trading volume. september program trading amounted to 13.8% of average daily new york stock exchange volume of 151.8 million shares, the largest percentage since the exchange began making such figures public in july 1988. a daily average of 20.9 million shares traded in program strategies in september, the second-highest level ever. the highest level was in june 1989, when a daily average of 22.1 million shares traded in program strategies. average daily trading volume in june of 180.3 million shares was considerably higher than in september. program trading amounted to 12.3% of average daily volume in june. the big board says program trading describes a variety of strategies involving the purchase or sale of a basket of 15 or more stocks. the most controversial of these is stock-index arbitrage, in which traders buy or sell baskets of stocks and offset the position with an opposite trade in stock-index futures to lock in profits. it's the most controversial form of program trading because it can create abrupt price swings in the stock market. salomon brothers inc. was the top program trader in september, but most of the firm's activity involved portfolio trading strategies other than stock-index arbitrage. overall, salomon reported program trading volume of 75.2 million shares. the top stock-index arbitrage firm last month was morgan stanley & co. of morgan stanley's 66.8 million shares in program trades for the month, 53.1 million were in stock-index arbitrage trades. behind second-place morgan stanley were kidder, peabody & co., goldman, sachs & co. and cs first boston inc. 's first boston corp. unit.
yet another political scandal is racking japan. but this time it's hurting opposition as well as ruling-party members. and as it unfolds, it's revealing some of the more tangled and seamier aspects of japanese society. already, ruling liberal democratic party demands that opposition members testify under oath in parliament have stalled one budget committee session and forced the committee to plan a special two-day investigation at the end of the month. but the scandal itself is so convoluted that ruling-party members are divided between those who want to pursue the matter in hope of undermining the opposition and those who favor leaving well enough alone. "the opposition can be the most hurt because everyone already figures the ldp is that kind of beast," says shigezo hayasaka, former aide to ldp kingmaker kakuei tanaka and now an independent analyst. but, he adds, "we can't tell where it will go at all because we're still in the middle of it." this time, the scandal centers on donations made by the not-quite-mainstream pachinko parlor industry. pachinko, a kind of pinball, is japan's favorite form of legal gambling. the donations so far appear to be small, especially compared with the huge sums that changed hands in the recruit co. influence-peddling scandal that plagued the ruling party last year. but the implications could be great. pachinko is slightly on the shady side, often linked to the lower ranks of japan's underworld and regularly at the top of annual lists of tax evaders. recently the industry has faced the threat of new restrictions, and political donations may have been made with the intent to bribe. also, about 60% of pachinko parlor owners are korean, many of whom maintain close ties with north or south korean residents' organizations, and donations by such foreign groups are illegal in japan. to many japanese, pachinko is benign or enticingly unsavory. garish neon pachinko marquees blaze from the main streets and narrow alleys of cities and towns across the country. devotees pass hours, watching the lights blink and listening to the metal balls ping, as much to gamble as to get a little time to be anonymous, alone with their thoughts. at 500 yen ($3.60) for a handful of balls, pachinko is a common pastime, and has been since it took root as cheap entertainment in the years after world war ii. but the total of all those pinging balls has created an industry with a reported annual income of 13 trillion yen (almost $92 billion), or nearly the size of japan's vaunted automobile industry. and because the pachinko industry is regularly at the top of annual lists for tax evasion, some observers estimate the real income could be as much as 20 trillion yen. if that money were being taxed, it could bring the government a badly needed several trillion yen. in 1984, an attempt was made to crack down on the industry with tougher restrictions. then, in 1988, a proposal to keep better track of income by selling prepaid cards for pachinko was fielded in parliament. the proposal split the industry in two, along the lines of national origin: north koreans oppose the plan while south koreans, japanese and taiwanese accept it or are neutral. in august, a conservative weekly magazine reported that a pachinko industry organization donated money to japan socialist party members. the magazine alleged that in making the donations, the pachinko industry may have been offering bribes to win support in the battle against prepaid cards, or it may have been laundering money back and forth between the jsp and the north korean residents' organization, the chosen soren. the chosen soren and the jsp immediately denied the report. and at first, neither the opposition nor the ldp wanted to pursue the issue. but the press kept it alive; as with the recruit scandal, lists began circulating with names of people who had received money. within a matter of weeks, less-conservative magazines reported that members of the ruling ldp had received much larger donations from pachinko organizations. so far, though, there have been no allegations that the contributions the ldp members received amounted to bribes. then the two camps upped the ante: reports that chosen soren had donated directly to jsp members were rapidly countered by statements that the south korean residents' organization had long been donating directly to ldp members. the jsp admitted oct. 13 that its members received about eight million yen from the pachinko organization, and charged ldp members with receiving 125 million yen ($880,000) and other opposition parties with taking about 2.5 million yen. on friday, the chief cabinet secretary announced that eight cabinet ministers had received five million yen from the industry, including 450,000 yen ($3,175) by prime minister toshiki kaifu. no one has alleged that the donations were by themselves illegal. direct donations from either of the residents' organizations would be illegal because the groups are defined as foreign, but both groups deny making direct donations. they say its possible some of their members may be donating privately. the issue is further complicated because although the organizations represent korean residents, those residents were largely born and raised in japan and many speak only japanese. that they retain korean citizenship and ties is a reflection of history -- their parents were shipped in as laborers during the decades when japan occupied korea before world war ii -- and the discrimination that still faces koreans in japanese society. many japanese think it only natural that the organizations or their members would donate to politicians, the way many japanese do, to win favor or support. both residents' organizations admit to receiving some funding from abroad. but ldp members and supporters of the prepaid card idea tend to speak in innuendo about the jsp's alleged donations, implying that north korean money would be more suspect than south korean because north korea is communist and south korea is an ally.
medchem products inc. said a u.s. district court in boston ruled that a challenge by medchem to the validity of a u.s. patent held by pharmacia inc. was "without merit." pharmacia, based in upsala, sweden, had charged in a lawsuit against medchem that medchem's amvisc product line infringes on the pharmacia patent. the patent is related to hyaluronic acid, a rooster-comb extract used in eye surgery. in its lawsuit, pharmacia is seeking unspecified damages and a preliminary injunction to block medchem from selling the amvisc products. a medchem spokesman said the products contribute about a third of medchem's sales and 10% to 20% of its earnings. in the year ended aug. 31, 1988, medchem earned $2.9 million, or 72 cents a share, on sales of $17.4 million. medchem said the court's ruling was issued as part of a "first-phase trial" in the patent-infringement proceedings and concerns only one of its defenses in the case. it said it is considering "all of its options in light of the decision, including a possible appeal." the medical-products company added that it plans to "assert its other defenses" against pharmacia's lawsuit, including the claim that it hasn't infringed on pharmacia's patent. medchem said that the court scheduled a conference for next monday -- to set a date for proceedings on pharmacia's motion for a preliminary injunction.
call it the "we're too broke to fight" defense. lawyers for dozens of insolvent savings and loan associations are trying a new tack in their efforts to defuse suits filed by borrowers, developers and creditors. the thrifts' lawyers claim that the suits, numbering 700 to 1,000 in texas alone, should be dismissed as moot because neither the s&ls nor the extinct federal savings and loan insurance corp. has the money to pay judgments. though the argument may have a common-sense ring to it, even the s&l lawyers concede there's little precedent to back their position. still, one federal appeals court has signaled it's willing to entertain the notion, and the lawyers have renewed their arguments in texas and eight other states where the defense is permitted under state law. the dismissal of the pending suits could go a long way toward clearing court dockets in texas and reducing the fslic's massive legal bills, which topped $73 million last year. the s&l lawyers were encouraged last month by an appellate-court ruling in two cases brought against defunct sunbelt savings & loan association of dallas by the developers of the valley ranch, best known as the training center for the dallas cowboys football team. sunbelt foreclosed on the ranch. sunbelt and the fslic argued to the fifth u.s. circuit court of appeals "that there will never be any assets with which to satisfy a judgment against sunbelt savings nor any means to collect from any other party, including fslic." "if true," the court wrote, "this contention would justify dismissal of these actions on prudential grounds." but the court said it lacked enough financial information about sunbelt and the fslic and sent the cases back to federal district court in dallas. charles haworth, a lawyer for sunbelt, says he plans to file a brief this week urging the district judge to dismiss the suits, because sunbelt's liabilities exceeded its assets by about $2 billion when federal regulators closed it in august 1988. "this institution is just brain dead," says mr. haworth, a partner in the dallas office of andrews & kurth, a houston law firm. but a lawyer for triland investment group, the developer of valley ranch, dismisses such arguments as a "defense du jour." attorney richard jackson of dallas says a judgment for triland could be satisfied in ways other than a monetary award, including the reversal of sunbelt's foreclosure on valley ranch. "we're asking the court for a number of things he can grant in addition to the thrill of victory," he says. "we'd take the valley ranch free and clear as a booby prize."
in response to your overly optimistic, outdated piece on how long unemployment lasts (people patterns, sept. 20): i am in the communications field, above entry level. i was laid off in august 1988, and after a thorough and exhausting job search, was hired in august 1989. my unemployment insurance ran out before i found a job; i found cutbacks and layoffs in many companies. the statistics quoted by the "new" census bureau report (garnered from 1984 to 1986) are out of date, certainly as an average for the northeast, and possibly for the rest of the country. i think what bothered me most about the piece was that there seemed to be an underlying attitude to tell your readers all is well -- if you're getting laid off don't worry, and if you're unemployed, it's a seller's market. to top it off, you captioned the graph showing the average number of months in a job search as "time off." are you kidding? looking for a job was one of the most anxious periods of my life -- and is for most people. your paper needs a serious reality check. reva levin cambridge, mass.
moody's investors service said it reduced its rating on $165 million of subordinated debt of this beverly hills, calif., thrift, citing turmoil in the market for low-grade, high-yield securities. the agency said it reduced its rating on the thrift's subordinated debt to b-2 from ba-2 and will keep the debt under review for possible further downgrade. columbia savings is a major holder of so-called junk bonds. new federal legislation requires that all thrifts divest themselves of such speculative securities over a period of years. columbia savings officials weren't available for comment on the downgrade. franklin savings association (ottawa, kan.) -- moody's investors service inc. said it downgraded its rating to b-2 from ba-3 on less than $20 million of this thrift's senior subordinated notes. the rating concern said franklin's "troubled diversification record in the securities business" was one reason for the downgrade, citing the troubles at its l.f. rothschild subsidiary and the possible sale of other subsidiaries. "they perhaps had concern that we were getting out of all these," said franklin president duane h. hall. "i think it was a little premature on their part."
the following u.s. treasury, corporate and municipal offerings are tentatively scheduled for sale this week, according to dow jones capital markets report: $15.2 billion of three-month and six-month bills. two-year notes, refinancing about $9.6 billion in maturing debt. $9.75 billion of 52-week bills. connecticut light & power co. -- three million shares of $25 preferred, via competitive bidding. b&h crude carriers ltd. -- four million common shares, via salomon brothers inc. baldwin technology co. -- 2.6 million class a shares, via smith barney harris upham & co. blockbuster entertainment corp. -- $250 million (face amount) liquid yield option notes, via merrill lynch capital markets. chase manhattan corp. -- 14 million common shares, via goldman, sachs & co. comcast corp. -- $150 million convertible debentures, via merrill lynch. css industries -- 1.3 million common shares, via merrill lynch. eastern utilities associates -- 1.5 million common shares, via painewebber inc. employee benefit plans inc. -- two million common shares, via dean witter capital markets. exabyte corp. -- 2,850,000 common shares, via goldman sachs. knowledgeware inc. -- 2.4 million common shares, via montgomery securities. oregon -- $100 million of general obligation veterans' tax notes, series 1989, via competitive bid. washington, d.c. -- $200 million of 1990 general obligation tax revenue notes (series 1990a), via competitive bid. virginia public school authority -- $55,730,000 of school financing bonds, 1989 series b (1987 resolution), via competitive bid. austin, texas -- $68,230,000 of various bonds, including $32 million hotel occupancy tax revenue bonds, series 1989a, and $36.23 million convention center revenue bonds, series 1989b, via a morgan stanley & co. group. california health facilities financing authority -- $144.5 million of kaiser permanente revenue bonds, via a painewebber group. connecticut -- $100 million of general obligation capital appreciation bonds, college savings plan, 1989 series b, via a prudential-bache capital funding group. pennsylvania higher education facilities authority -- $117 million of revenue bonds for hahnemann university, series 1989, via a merrill lynch group. tennessee valley authority -- three billion of power bonds, via first boston corp. university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey -- $55 million of series c bonds, via a prudential-bache group. west virginia parkways, economic development and tourism authority -- $143 million of parkway revenue bonds, series 1989, via a painewebber group. san antonio, texas -- $640 million of gas and electric revenue refunding bonds, via a first boston group. south dakota health & education facility authority -- $51.1 million of rapid city regional hospital bonds, via a dougherty, dawkins, strand & yost inc. group.
small investors matched their big institutional brethren in anxiety over the weekend, but most seemed to be taking a philosophical approach and said they were resigned to riding out the latest storm in the stock market. "i'm not losing faith in the market," said boston lawyer christopher sullivan as he watched the market plunge on a big screen in front of a brokerage firm. but he's not so sure about everyone else. "i think on monday the small (investors) are going to panic and sell," predicted mr. sullivan, whose investments include amr corp. 's american airlines unit and several mutual funds. "and i think institutions are going to come in and buy . . . i'm going to hold on. if i sell now, i'll take a big loss." some evinced an optimism that had been rewarded when they didn't flee the market in 1987. "oh, i bet it'll be up 50 points on monday," said lucy crump, a 78-year-old retired housewife in lexington, ky. mrs. crump said her ashwood investment club's portfolio lost about one-third of its value following the black monday crash, "but no one got discouraged, and we gained that back -- and more." at the annual congress of the national association of investors corp. at the hyatt regency hotel in minneapolis, the scene was calm. some 500 investors representing investor clubs from around the u.s. were attending when the market started to slide friday. but robert showalter, an official of the association, said no special bulletins or emergency meetings of the investors' clubs are planned. in fact, some of the association's members -- long-term, buy-and-hold investors -- welcomed the drop in prices. "we hope to take advantage of it," said john snyder, a member of a los angeles investors' club. he has four stocks in mind to buy if the prices drop to the level he wants. not everyone is reacting so calmly, however, and many wonder about the long-term implications of what is widely viewed as the cause of friday's slide, reluctance by banks to provide financing for a buy-out of ual corp., parent of united airlines. marc perkins, a tampa, fla., investment banker, said the market drop is one of "a tremendous number of signs that the leveraged take-out era is ending. there's no question that there's a general distaste for leverage among lenders." mr. perkins believes, however, that the market could be stabilized if california investor marvin davis steps back in to the united bidding with an offer of $275 a share. sara albert, a 34-year-old dallas law student, says she's generally skittish about the stock market and the takeover activity that seems to fuel it. "i have this feeling that it's built on sand," she says, that the market rises "but there's no foundation to it." she and her husband pulled most of their investments out of the market after the 1987 crash, although she still owns some texaco stock. partly because of concern about the economy and partly because she recently quit her job as a legal assistant to go to school, "i think at this point we want to be a lot more liquid." others wonder how many more of these shocks the small investor can stand. "we all assumed october '87 was a one-time shot," said san francisco attorney david greenberg. "we told the little guy it could only happen once in a lifetime, come on back. now it's happening again." mr. greenberg got out just before the 1987 crash and, to his regret, never went back even as the market soared. this time he's ready to buy in "when the panic wears off." still, he adds: "we can't have this kind of thing happen very often. when the little guy gets frightened, the big guys hurt badly. merrill lynch can't survive without the little guy." small investors have tiptoed back into the market following black monday, but mostly through mutual funds. discount brokerage customers "have been in the market somewhat but not whole hog like they were two years ago," says leslie quick jr., chairman of the quick & reilly discount brokerage firm. hugo quackenbush, senior vice president at charles scwhab corp., says schwab customers "have been neutral to cautious recently about stocks." individual investors are still angry about program trading, mr. quackenbush says. avner arbel, a cornell university finance professor, says government regulators will have to more closely control program trading to "win back the confidence of the small investor." but it's not only the stock market that has some small investors worried. alan helfman, general sales manager of a chrysler dealership in houston, said he and his mother have some joint stock investments, but the overall economy is his chief worry. "these high rollers took a big bath today," he said in his showroom, which is within a few miles of the multi-million dollar homes of some of houston's richest citizens. "and i can tell you that a high roller isn't going to come in tomorrow and buy a chrysler tc by maserati." and, finally, there were the gloaters. "i got out in 1987. everything," said pascal antori, an akron, ohio, plumbing contractor who was visiting chicago and stopped by fidelity investments' lasalle street office. "i just stopped by to see how much i would have lost." would mr. antori ever get back in? "are you kidding! when it comes to money: once bitten, 2,000 times shy."